---
source:
  # From source (MarshmalloW): Someone pointed out that the following 
  # interviews were probably intended to be accessed through a "library card"
  # that helps fund the radio program. So consider purchasing one 
  # (http://www.yourownhealthandfitness.org/?page_id=483) to support a worthy
  # site!

  # Will have to build a feature to support call's to action for such things.
  series: Your Own Health And Fitness
  title: Nutrition and the Endocrine System
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/yohaf-970211-nutrition-and-the-endocrine-system.mp3
  mirrors:
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/yohaf-970211-nutrition-and-the-endocrine-system.mp3
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/yohaf-970211-nutrition-and-the-endocrine-system.vtt
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-29"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-29"
---
 [0:00] Good afternoon and welcome to your own health and fitness talk show. I'm health integration specialist Lena Berman. I'm here live with you every Tuesday at noon talking to you about health care and fitness trends and I usually take your phone calls now this week's show is the final of two special pledge drive shows. Today I'll be interviewing biologist and medical activist Dr. Raymond Pete. He's a pioneer in the use of natural progesterone therapy among other things and the author of several books. Now today we'll be talking until 12.30 we'll take our usual short musical break. During that break what I'm going to hope is that you will use that time instead of calling in to ask questions today to call in and become a part of KPFA by joining at several different levels. Any level will work. However if you join at a level of $60 you get a choice of three different books written [1:04] by Ray Pete. You can have your choice of one for $60 the books are women in nutrition, generative energy and mind and tissue which is about the Russian research perspective on the human brain. So each one of these books is yours with a pledge of $60 to KPFA in other words as a thank you gift. We will send along one of these wonderful books, these wonderfully thought provoking books. Now if you want two of these books and you can choose any two that you want you can have that as a thank you gift for a pledge of $100. Three books with a pledge of $150 you can get all three of Ray Pete's books. So today instead of opening up the phone lines for you to ask questions I'm going to ask you to support the show with your pledges. I want to remind people before we get into the show that if you want information about cassette copies of your own health and fitness or if you need to reach me you just call my office during normal business hours and my office number is 707-769-1458 and I'll give [2:08] that number out again at the end of the show. Now if you want to pledge during this hour our pledge drive numbers are 510-848-5732 or if you're out of our area code here you can dial us at 1-800-439-5732. Now I understand that you may want to listen to this interview and I won't blame you if you do but at 1230 I will open up the lines and let you call in to do some pledging and then we'll get back to our interview and finish up at about quarter to one. Let me not editorialize today let me get right to my guests because we have an awful lot to talk about and it's very very very provocative wonderful stuff. So Ray I believe you're there with us yes? I am. Okay. Introduced to many people for the first time as the researcher from whom Dr. John Lee author of what your doctor may not tell you about metapause first learned about the benefits of natural progesterone supplementation. Dr. Raymond Pete received his PhD in biology from the University of Oregon specializing [3:09] in physiology. He has written mind and tissue progesterone in ortho molecular medicine and nutrition for women including a new book which I believe we may be privy to at some point soon. He's also written several articles and journals. He has taught at the University of Oregon, Urbana College, Montana State University, National College of Naturopathic Medicine, Universidad Veracruzana and the Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Mexico and he also founded Blake College International University. He does independent research and private endocrinological and nutritional counseling. So welcome to you and so pleased that you took the time out to come and be with us. Let me start with I want to talk about more than just a progesterone today I want to talk about everything but I would I would like for those people who are not who don't know your work very well I'd like to ask you how you came to the conclusion that women need [4:12] supplementation with natural progesterone and not with estrogen. In the fifties I saw people getting estrogen therapy and dying or going crazy or getting rheumatoid arthritis and I it was so obvious that like one woman went into a mental breakdown an hour after she had an injection of estrogen and her daughter died at the age of 27 after taking early birth control pills that were high in estrogen and I began just keeping my ears open to the nature of the research that was supporting it and realized that it really was all advertising and the research went completely in the other direction and so I decided to go back to graduate school I'd been in linguistics and literature and [5:17] I intended to study nerve biology and I thought that that was dominated by some very foolish dogmas and the least dogmatic work was being done in reproductive physiology and there I thought that estrogen explained infertility and reproductive aging it accelerated or imitated all of the known age related changes. This is true for men as well. Yeah and these changes are so fundamental and general that you can't really distinguish between the free radical damage done by unopposed estrogen or by heavy metals or by x-rays or by anything that interferes with oxidative metabolism. [6:17] As you just said what you discovered is that aging and estrogen dominant shared symptoms a lot of people don't realize that when men age it isn't that they are losing testosterone in particular mostly what's happening is that they're gaining estrogen. For example prostate enlargement and cancer occurs in aging men and it is precisely the men who are deficient in testosterone and have an excess of estrogen who get the enlarged and cancerous prostate. And so what we're saying is that aging and estrogen dominance share symptoms which include diminished cellular respiratory capacity which causes energy loss and it increases your risk of cancer. And it's a vicious circle too because estrogen not only causes the respiratory defect but once you get stressed and thick even an acute stress drastically raises your body's estrogen [7:17] so that hospitalized people men or women typically have very high estrogen levels. A heart attack for example is associated with very high estrogen levels in men. I might mention here also that I think we've at least those of us who listen to alternative radio KPFA as an example know about the fact that our environment is full of estrogenic xenoestrogen mimicking chemicals lots of pesticides and what not. This is very old information in the 60s when I was starting my research I saw that for decades people had known that soot is full of a vast number of estrogenic compounds the same things which are carcinogenic and smoke have a very neat estrogenic function. That's why estrogen was such an easy thing to commercialize by the drug companies because [8:18] you could find it everywhere. I want to talk about progesterone but before we talk about progesterone I'd like you to describe what role the thyroid plays in restoring balance when estrogen is dominant. The liver this was work done by the biskins in the early 1940s. The liver is the main thing that regulates and holds your estrogen in check and the liver to do its work requires adequate protein nutrition essentially and a basic amount of B vitamins but these don't work unless you have adequate thyroid to make the liver able to metabolize the protein. This would also explain why more women have trouble with thyroid function. I think the other things you mentioned is that we already have estrogen and have as you put it in the book less active livers although I'm really noticing that with increased [9:18] alcohol consumption use of pharmaceuticals and then what we just talked about the estrogenic environmental pollutants and the sorts of infectious diseases that men are getting that men as well are quite estrogen dominant. But it does seem that women tend to be the ones that are red flagged the fastest for low thyroid symptoms. Why is it hard to evaluate the adequacy of thyroid function with a blood test? It wouldn't necessarily be so hard but the scientific work that was being done in the 30s and early 40s showed that respiration goes down as your thyroid goes down but the basic technique simply involved measuring how much oxygen you would breathe in a period of a few minutes and the drug companies didn't have any way to market air to be breathed [10:18] in the lab and they came up with a blood test called the protein pound iodine measurement and sold everyone on the idea that this was scientific and it turned out that instead of 40%!o(MISSING)f the population being low respirers only 5%!w(MISSING)ere low in the protein pound iodine test and when I was in school everyone who was overweight had been told by their doctors that they had behavior or personality defects not a hormone problem because the drug companies convinced everyone that really needed thyroid that since the test didn't show low thyroid that 95%!o(MISSING)f the people have some other problem but in the 60s the protein bound iodine was found to have essentially nothing to do with thyroid function and what remained in everyone's [11:20] mind was that the 95%!o(MISSING)f the population do not need thyroid and now no matter how perfect the test might measure your thyroid response the fixed idea is that you are not likely to need thyroid. Yeah in fact actually when a lot of people who present with some of the symptoms that you describe in the book that would indicate a possible problem with thyroid like having an extremely low resting pulse and in my case this is not someone who is athletic their temperature is below normal very much below normal pulses as I mentioned slow reflexes are not quite right they are cold all the time you know all of these things that we normally associate with low thyroid function and then when the doctor does a panel they are not seeing a low thyroid in the blood. Yeah and either over or underweight can be caused by low thyroid so it isn't just a [12:26] matter of fat people needing thyroid very often people who can't gain a normal amount of weight need thyroid and dry skin and falling hair are two of the very important indicators and those tend to increase with aging and to some extent they can be reversed by restoring the hormones. Just a few months ago someone found that an anti estrogen chemical restores hair growth in animals and this is one of the things that thyroid researchers have suspected that low thyroid people have high estrogen and estrogen interferes with the development of the cell follicle the hair follicle. And estrogen also makes it difficult for the body to utilize thyroid and for the thyroid to produce it but I mean even if you're taking supplemental thyroid if your estrogen levels [13:27] are high it will also interfere. So what we've got here is a situation where people are walking around with these symptoms do you have any suggestions on how people are going to get their doctors to respond to this I mean if they're doing a blood test and they're seeing I mean one of the ways that I've sort of intervened is to have people have their doctors also check for antibody levels and that sometimes gets their attention. Well what I usually do is go over a person's problems and have them make a list of at least five of the classical indicators of hypothyroidism, cold hands and feet, gaining weight when they don't eat very much, being constipated, having dry skin and hair and all of their about 200 classical indicators and if a person puts together a list of complaints any doctor that went to medical school is likely to recognize by the time they've named five or six classical [14:31] complaints that there could be a thyroid problem. I'll throw in a couple more people who are low in, the body converts thyroid into T3 it's kind of complicated I want to get into the specific of it but if you're too low in T3 if you don't have enough you also become very depressive and also in my because I work with people in a variety of ways including exercise if people begin to do exercise they begin to gain weight if the thyroid is not functioning well. In addition to that what you've cautioned against is people doing what we call aerobic exercise but doing it in a state where they're out of breath so these people who do exhaustive you know hours of running and getting on the stair master and they're almost breathless and they do this for a long period of time may in fact or certainly in fact are suppressing thyroid function. Yes someone put volunteers on a treadmill and had them walk for 40 minutes keeping their pulse rate under 120 feet per minute so gentle exercise just for 40 minutes and then they [15:36] measured the amount of the active thyroid hormone T3 in their blood and it had gone to zero in that short time. For people who are just tuning in this is KPFA and I'm a health integration specialist Lane and Berman your own health and fitness is the show it's a special pledge drive show and I have Dr. Raymond Pete a researcher and medical activist on the line and we're discussing right now progesterone and thyroid and we'll move on to some other very important hormones. We will open the lines at 1230 but this time it's going to be for you to pledge and what you can do if you pledge is get as a thank you gift one of Ray Pete's fabulous books now these are self published books these are not on the bookshelves this is a special deal from KPFA you can get his books directly from him but we have them here and we will give you a book with a pledge of $60 we'll give you two books for $100 and we'll give you all three of his books for a pledge of $150 as a thank you gift at 1230 we'll open up the lines at 848-5732 in this area code or 1-800-439-5732 so stay tuned for that. [16:45] One of the things that also can happen is what we have an estrogenic environment and then we have these dietary changes that have occurred in the United States over the last few years suddenly the food industry has been pushing polyunsaturated vegetable oils they've been pushing a high carbohydrate diet stressing the use of soy and legumes in the diet and in fact it looks to me as though the cancer rates have gone through the ceiling and in addition to that I think there's just an endemic problem with thyroid right now would you like to comment on that? In the 30s one of the indicators of that it was a very reliable sign that the thyroid was low when the blood cholesterol level was very high and people demonstrated that if you removed the thyroid gland there immediately their blood cholesterol started up and if you gave them a thyroid supplement immediately the blood cholesterol would return to normal [17:49] and it happens that if you poison the liver it can't make cholesterol and someone discovered that if you feed the animals a very large amount of unsaturated seed oils it will suppress the cholesterol while also suppressing their metabolism and the farm pig farmers for example found it useful to add large amounts of corn or soybeans to the animals diets to make them hypometabolic so they've got fat on very little food but the same procedure is so toxic to the liver that it doesn't normally in itself cause a direct elevation of cholesterol the way simple hypothyroidism does and the even though it was established that low thyroid [18:52] individuals were susceptible to heart disease because of the thyroid deficiency the fact that low thyroid people have high cholesterol became attached with the thought that cholesterol could be blamed instead of low thyroid and the promotion of the seed oils was largely based on the idea that it would lower cholesterol and prevent heart disease but in fact it lowers cholesterol while causing hypothyroidism and just in the last few years the research is accumulating showing that it is not really connected directly at all with cholesterol but heart disease is the result of plaque that develops in blood vessels and that this plaque is like age pigment the product of free radical breakdown of unsaturated fats and that the blood vessels are most intimately exposed to both oxygen abundant iron from [20:00] the hemoglobin and the unsaturated fats that are either being digested or drawn out of storage and so you have the perfect conditions for creating free radicals during stress when the free radical when the unsaturated fats are circulating in the bloodstream. So what we're saying Ray is that this sort of moved in addition not only did they introduce unsaturated fats as a panacea for saving everybody's lives but these were also very badly processed they were heated they were highly processed which makes the free radical production even worse but in addition to that you know there's a whole sort of mythology about diet I mean there are people telling us that the Asian Asian people don't get cancer and that you know soy is wonderful and all of this and I know you have very strong opinions about this and I'd like to hear you talk about them. Well the soy monopoly is really extremely powerful in the [21:06] United States it subsidizes research and propaganda medical society meetings and books and it's doing just a very powerful job of diverting people's attention from this research which has coming out showing that unsaturated fats are intimately involved in heart disease and strokes and what they're doing is over and over repeating certain associations that breast cancer is lower in Japan for example than in the United States and when Japanese live in this country they have the same rate of breast cancer as Americans but they neglect everything else that was traditional in Japan women didn't smoke for example they tended to stay at home and they ate lots [22:13] of strange shellfish and all kinds of foods that are simply not available in the United States well you know what people say about soy and what's confusing to people the consumers is that on the one hand there's supposed to be these sort of estrogenic phytoestrogens in soy and then there's also this this concept of there being isoflavones in better well let me just finish what it is so people know what I'm talking about which is not estrogen but they're estrogen analogs that take up the receptor sites and are supposed to protect against estrogen so this is confusing for people because I think oh we're supposed to eat soy because it protects against that and then other but so what do you say well that that same ideology is being used to promote estriol as the weak natural estrogen but estriol has essentially the same kind of toxicity that any estrogen does [23:17] and we should remember that DES which caused even generations later abnormalities in cancer in the babies that DES is a classical weak estrogen that doesn't it doesn't have the same strong concentration relationship to estrogen effects but it has very broad capacity to disrupt cell functions while acting in many ways like an estrogen and so the weakness has nothing to do with the toxicity the weakness of binding to the estrogen receptor the estrogenic substances can't be just as toxic whether or not they bind to the so-called estrogen receptor because there are so many ways that estrogen has its effect not just the classical so-called receptor for [24:25] 40 years or so people recognized that estrogen had a wide spectrum of instantaneous effects it imitates the shock reaction and causes cells to take up water and such in a time that it couldn't possibly be acting through the classical receptor so there is sort of either a signal action or a chemical action of any estrogenic substance which has nothing to do with the estrogen receptors and when you compare estriol and DES and the phytoestrogens what they have in common is that they are toxic to the reproductive system will cause miscarriages and abortions the there are strains of sheep which are known to be resistant to phytoestrogens and they happen to be the ones that are adapted to live elevations because the phytoestrogens cause abortions by interfering [25:33] with the oxidative metabolism so if they have a special resistant hemoglobin and physiology they can stand the phytoestrogens but when you test them on a range of lab animals these bioflavonoids or isoflavones and so on have the same drastic toxic effects that DES for example has they cause deformities in the genitals of the baby animals when the mothers are exposed to them so basically just because we have listeners who are not at all scientific in their mindset before we go to a quick break what you're saying is that whether you want to say that they whatever you want to say what you're saying is that soy still has estrogenic effects which means that it's going to oppose and interfere with thyroid function and that people who are eating and we'll come back to this after we take a break people are eating diets who are high in soy and and also other [26:35] legumes may in fact be creating a hypo or low thyroid condition yeah at the time some of these claims were coming out several months ago I noticed a report from China that there were 100 million hypothyroid people there and goitreism um um cretinism and so on are extremely common in bean eating soybean or any kind of beans the Andes and all the way from the mountains of central Mexico to the tip of South America the bean eating cultures have an extremely high incidence of goitre and cretinism okay well listen we're going to take a very very brief musical break so hold that thought and we'll come back to it this is your own health and fitness talk show on kpfam health integration specialist doing a special pledge drive show with Raymond pete researcher and a medical activist we are going to open up your phone lines here and let you [27:38] call in to do some pledging for about 45 seconds it's 510-848-5732 in our area code 848-5732 or 1-800-439-5732 if you're out of the area code 1-800-HAKE-KPFA for $60 pledge you can choose women in nutrition generative energy or mind and tissue one book you can have two books for 100 bucks as a thank you gift or all three of them for a pledge of $150 to support this programming these books are not available on the bookshelf we are going to give them to you with a pledge we're going to take a brief musical break we'll be right back with more of Raymond pete by to make me lose my voice got all my circuits open my system's reading go [28:41] your cellular organization baby stop the show welcome back this is lana burman health integration specialist your own health and fitness on kpfa during a special pledge drive show you can keep calling those of you who are on the line right now and those who wish to get copies of dr. Raymond pete's books we have some as a thank you gift for pledging during this hour the number again is 510-848-5732 or 1-800-HAKE-KPFA or 1-800-439-5732 we are going to give you with a pledge today one of Raymond pete's books they are women in nutrition generative energy and mind and tissue which is [29:43] the russian research perspective on the human brain one of these books with a $60 pledge will give you as a thank you gift two books for $100 or all three of his books which are only available they're self-published they're only either available from dr. pete himself or by pledging today kpfa we will give you these books as a thank you gift in show of our appreciation now you won't hear ray pete on any other radio show he is not someone who is who is commonly heard in the media he's a very special person and he's very discriminating about where he will appear i have a long relationship with him and he is brilliant this is the man who turned everybody's minds around about the use of estrogen or we're still working on changing their minds anyway what we're talking about right now is the fact that not only because of environmental situation in our environment with the chemicals and whatnot but also by the way that people have been eating over the last few decades there is an increase in the number of [30:46] people who are suffering from thyroid disease and particularly low thyroid a lot of it's undiagnosed and we've been talking about the role of diet and what we were just saying is all these people who say that the asian diet is healthier ray just shared with us a statistic which is hard word to say that there are a hundred million cretins people with thyroid disease in china that's significant um so the other thing is is is the use of high quality animal protein to increase uh energy um part of what we're talking about when we talk about thyroid is increasing oxidation and energy respiration and energy in the cells yes uh yeah and i'm not sure of all of the ways in which protein supports thyroid but um in effect the liver seems to think we're starving to death if we don't get adequate high quality protein uh it has the function of [31:47] making albumin and other proteins to maintain blood physiology and if it's deficient in the right amino acids that you get from high quality proteins such as milk and eggs um it acts as if it's starving and um it sends out signals to uh draw on the body's own proteiny tissues but to prevent the rapid breakdown of the body's own tissues when you're not eating enough protein the body senses the uh changed chemistry and very quickly suppresses the thyroid um so it's there is this known connection between a protein deficiency or imbalance and an adaptive suppression of the thyroid so um that's one of the important outcomes is that people on a low protein diet um their thyroid turns down so that they don't eat [32:52] up their own tissues um this it's the same as going on a fast you lose weight for the first day but then your thyroid is suppressed and uh after day one you lose only about an ounce a day or something yeah i don't like um fast because i think they also have a detrimental effect on on metabolism even if people are drinking juices and stuff yeah um you like people to use along with milk and eggs and animal protein and i should mention that these need to be clean source as clean as you can find because obviously the dairy and meat industries are fond of putting hormones in their products so you do need to be aggressive about uh locating stores that sell free range and and ask questions you know really watch out for your food source um but but using you know uh some form of animal protein and you like uh mixing this with a fruit as a carbohydrate and also white potatoes um why don't you like the use of grain um because the um the the plant [34:00] defense system puts its worst toxins in the seed to prevent its next generation and these toxins uh turn out to apparently have been evolved to make the uh seed um undesirable to animals by blocking their digestion poisoning their metabolism and uh so it takes pretty fancy treatment to make them even digestible and useful that's where the uh traditional leavening process comes in it helps to detoxify the the grains and uh so the worst grain material is one which is not traditionally processed uh the american native cultures found that by boiling their grains with alkali they would detoxify them enough that they weren't terribly poisonous but still they [35:02] they weren't adequate nutrition in themselves um the particular type of calorie in grains um their their protein value should be discounted because the protein is of such low quality not just the quantity but the quality is the lowest protein known and so if you count them as calories what you see is either unsaturated fats or starches and the um white refined flour for example is essentially pure glucose starches made up of a chain of glucose molecules where fruit sugar is half fructose and half glucose and glucose is a powerful stimulant to insulin and the synthesis of fat and so the the grains are well designed to cause obesity [36:04] that these complex carbohydrates which are chemically pure glucose um stimulate fat production and increase the appetite um so that they start the chain of of putting on fat the fruit um the fructose component of fruit sugar um does not have that powerful effect on insulin it's um very slow and indirect the fruit um comes with many of the minerals which work in place of insulin and have a slightly suppressive effect on the insulin and um the um the the fruit has a strange side effect um it happens to promote cholesterol production and that's one of the reasons I emphasize having plenty of fruit sugar because the fructose while it doesn't cause [37:07] obesity it does help your liver to produce more um cholesterol which is then available if your thyroid is functioning to turn into the protective hormones pregnenolone and progesterone now we we're running out of time we've got about six minutes left and I know that there are some other issues that we want to cover albeit quickly so I apologize for this because they're important and as usual they need to reschedule another show with you particularly when your new book comes out uh coconut oil you know you made a dent there are nutritionists talking about how great coconut oil is and how it's a metabolic stimulant so much for the idea that saturated fat is nasty I think what we're talking about is that if your thyroid is not functioning well if it's suppressed either through diet or or stress or environmental things your body needs the cholesterol from these sources in order to create these hormones if your thyroid is suppressed you then will have problems with cholesterol yeah when I see someone with above average cholesterol I think they're in pretty good [38:13] shape because um I've I've seen people drop their cholesterol levels 80 points a day 60 to 80 points by using quick acting uh thyroid when they had to pass a health exam for example um so it's no problem at all to get your high cholesterol down to normal but to get low cholesterol up to normal so that you have the defensive anti-cancer anti-aging anti-stress hormones um fruit is really the only practical thing I know of that will help the liver recover from the toxic unsaturated fats and estrogens and other things that block cholesterol production Ray what is going on when someone becomes hyperthyroid um you know grave's disease or the other well there are three kinds of grave's disease hyperthyroid youth thyroid and hypothyroid so grave's disease is not synonymous with hyperthyroidism and uh very often people are diagnosed as being [39:24] hyperthyroid on the basis of having elevated thyroxin um in their blood in spite of very often having many signs of low thyroid and uh so you can't go by the the standard idea of what hyperthyroidism is um occasionally I see someone who is really hyperthyroid and um that is generally a corrective process if they just for example eat some uh exaggeratedly nutritious foods lots of eggs maybe some liver um plenty of very concentrated food um usually the the thyroid is unloading its excess and will correct itself in anywhere from three months to a year that's a very short answer for a complicated question so I apologize if we're short if we're giving a short answer to [40:26] something that's complicated um there there have been publications on different ways to treat it and the um outcome of the the good studies was that radiation and surgery are almost never right the um conservative treatment either using diet or or a drug just to control the symptoms um always leads practically always leads to resolution without the damage of surgery or radiation we only have about uh two or three minutes but I and it's terrible to do this in the last seconds of the show but um I wanted to say something about pregnenolone and DHEA um mostly when you like using these it's when people are over 50 when the levels of DHEA decrease if someone tests there are tests now you test DHEA levels if you test low should you not try pregnenolone first since it's the beginning of the chain the pathway of hormones yeah uh pregnenolone is [41:29] essentially always safe it stops the stress reaction and will um whether you have for example Cushing's syndrome with too much cortisone or Addison's disease with too little pregnenolone like progesterone will put you right down the middle and uh correct whatever is wrong and it's protective even if it isn't uh correcting a disease process and it will very often correct the DHEA level but I interpret the blood tests of or saliva tests of DHEA really as indicating more about liver function than about your need or actual tissue levels of the DHEA without doing a tissue biopsy I don't think there's any clear way to evaluate your DHEA status and it's better just to correct everything else so who should try pregnenolone anyone who's um over 48 or 50 and feeling like they've suddenly run into an energy wall [42:38] um if if things are just like their skin is deteriorating and looking old and they have no energy and they're depressed and so on it very often is just because their glands have sort of um hit the barrier of accumulated iron and unsaturated fatty acids that make stress poison your adaptive system rather than stimulating it okay um you know I have to let you go and I'm I'm really sorry because uh we really didn't get a chance to talk about the use of progesterone in fertility issues and to prevent uh ADD type children and stuff so what we'll have to do if it's okay with you Ray is get you back on to talk about the new book because I think all of that will be in the new book is that not true yeah that book will be called um female hormones in context and we're still looking for someone to print it properly so um I'll be in touch with you and we'll reschedule as soon as that book is out in the meantime I really want to thank you for [43:38] your generosity I want to thank you for donating the books today and most of all donating your time and being so patient with us as you explain these very complex issues Rayman Pete thank you so much thank you okay talk to you soon bye uh well um now it's your turn uh Ray has been generous with us now we need you and as usual what I'm coming to you and asking you to do is creating a context for this show because uh this show means everything to me it's the most important thing I do in my life it's a realization of a dream and for me to have the opportunity to interview people like researchers like this who are not in the mainstream who uh have avoided the mainstream so that he is not beholden or or any obligation to lie to you uh he's not connected to any companies which is a hard thing to find these days with researchers and he has kept himself very pure he's a very political person um the information he's giving you is not in the mainstream and you won't hear it anywhere else but KPFA this is the second show I've done with him I'm going to get [44:42] him back on to talk about his new book this is absolutely groundbreaking information he's very very important researcher um we're giving away three of his books today you want to call us now the numbers again are five ten eight four eight five seven three two or one eight hundred hey kpfa four three nine five seven three two and the books are women and nutrition for sixty dollars generative energy which is a fascinating book it's very political and it also talks about the whole context of biologists about all the stuff we were talking about today mind and tissue which is uh also for 60 it is the russian research perspective on the human brain this is also about energy and self-function it's talking about how important the brain is how the metabolism and the behavior adaptation and stress in the brain so brain health each book is 60 uh it's a it's a thank you gift for pledging 60 bucks you can have two of the books for a hundred bucks you can have all three for 150 I don't see any callers come on people do you like this information you guys [45:43] clamored for me to get him back on after I had him on the first time I was overwhelmed with calls the station was overwhelmed with calls this book is not available on book show big bookstore shelves easy for me to say these books are only available directly from Raymond Pete his information about where to reach him how to get consultations about his newsletter and his other books are all in the back of these books you could get online with him and with us by now calling and pledging and getting these books all three of these books are fascinating reading you will not find these concepts anywhere else if it weren't for him women would still be being given um estrogen without even any question I mean thank goodness he and and John Lee became friends and uh John Lee started to to promote uh pedestrian repeat is is not someone who goes out and and toots his own horn he's he's not easy to find he has a busy practice he's researching and writing books he's not interested in selling an idea uh his books are phenomenal and you have an opportunity that's rare [46:49] now you can support the station you can support the show and enable me to continue to bring you this kind of very unusual information it's based on my 15-year relationship with him that he's willing to do these shows you won't hear this on another radio station support us now so please call it's 510-848-5732-1800-439-5732 or 1800-KPFA did you like that show? I did I I was listening up there so it and I the first time I had heard him um when he was talking about the uh progesterine I thought it was very interesting an interesting perspective he had on the whole issue but I'm sitting here looking at this book nutrition for women and on the back it says um what he talks about in here is chronic fatigue premenstrual tension breast pain skin nutrition and hormones estrogen and anxiety the danger of iron supplements so I think that it's very these these are very useful books if you would like to get a copy of one of the three that Lane is offering today [47:54] you need to give us a call at 510-848-5732 she's offering as a gift as a gift for subscribing to kpfa women in nutrition for a 60 dollar pledge uh generative energy for a 60 dollar pledge mind and tissues for a 60 dollar pledge and um if you're running into uh busy signs a busy on the phone right now um we're getting a really good response so if you would like to uh get a copy of these books we will let you know when a line is open keep calling um sometimes it keeps ringing and then it cuts you off but don't give up these books are well worth having I think probably the best package we're offering today is to get off three of the books for 150 dollars yeah I mean because what you're essentially doing is protecting this type of programming you're also letting me know what you want but by getting all three this these are for not as a phenomenal package because women in nutrition is particularly about women and nutrition it does cross over to men in nutrition [48:56] as well because it's the same issues of hypothyroidism genitive energy is almost like a dissertation on the relationship between biology and ecology and it's a it's a call against reductionist thinking but it has solid information about the all of the historical perspective on the research we've been talking about about thyroid and energy and it makes it possible for you to really understand what's going on it's a real call to action he's very political and mind and tissue is very provocative because it is harkening back to rike and trends in eastern europe about energy and self-function and the brain very interesting stuff considering what's going on with with attention deficit disorder and all of these things that we're seeing um and you can have all three of these books for 150 dollars and you support the station and you support the show I think it's I think it's really wonderful when um folks that that we bring in especially folks that may not bring them on this show are willing to make available to our listeners this information you know it they're [49:57] giving us these books at no cost for us because they believe in kpfa they believe in our listeners they believe this information is information that you could benefit from you're not going to go to a regular your regular medical doctor and get this oh no information it's like this is what we do for this take this pill well and it's a matter of fact for that as a matter of fact I think that I'm going to order some additional copies of generative energy to give to some of my clients because I think they need to give this to their doctors because doctors are not getting it I mean I'm getting clients who are having their doctors call me and they're saying why do you want me to check with iraid I mean it's like they're being receptive they're listening but but if I could shoot over a copy of generative energy so go into your doctor's office armed with this research you know 1800 hey kpfa or 5108485732 write down the number if you're not getting through you can continue to call after the show is over we will continue to give you some books for some period of time oh yeah yeah you can you can keep calling in I think why don't you talk a little [50:58] bit about what's coming up what's coming up in terms of programming well actually next week's show is going to be fun I've I've got a sexologist dr. Lonnie bar back you know there was a question about whether to do this for the pledge drive because it's so close to valentine's day so it's going to be a little late but we're going to still talk about her new book which is 50 ways to please your lover I'm ready to read this book um so you may want to pick up a copy of this book and it did you know ahead of time and then uh it isn't the show uh you know what I have coming up that's really exciting is I noticed that dr. Oliver sacks was going to be in town so I call this publicist and she said well yes he would be glad to so he's coming live I'm going to be sitting here talking to him yeah I can't tell you what it means to me to have access to these people it's dying and going to heaven I really have just realized a dream by doing this and you make it possible by joining the station it's because of you it's because of you that I do the show it's a volunteer basis I spend two days a week doing this show uh and I do it because it's a feedback loop you give back to me I give back to you I encounter these researchers their ideas get out I mean we're doing we're part of [52:03] the solution we're becoming part of the solution together well let's give the numbers again 1-800 okay we got a couple lines open 9-573-2 if you were getting a busy um a few moments ago now we have to be doing in fact have a few lines open or if you're in the 510 area code 510-848-573-2 call and ask for either one of the books that Lane is offering today women in nutrition generative energy mind and tissues for $60 pledge each or just go ahead and go for the $150 pledge yeah it's only you know it's less than about ten dollars a month on the EFT plan you can also put this on your master card or your visa you can you can do it the way it works best for you you can even consider taking out a gift subscription if you are a subscriber already you know consider upgrading your subscription or if you are a new listener to this show call in now become a new subscriber you can also subscribe at the $45 rate if you can afford [53:06] 60 and you'll still get a copy of the uh our program guide every month the number again 510-848-573-2 there's a couple of lines open now you have an opportunity to get in there now we have only you know a few more moments before we need to move on to the next show a couple lines open here folks 510-848-573-2 or 1-800-439-573-2 you can call us right now I want to ask you Lane what is the most important thing you want listeners to know about um Ray Pete's work the thing that's most important is that he you remember the old days where there used to be these uh bumper stickers that said question authority well that's what Ray Pete is about he says look if you go back and you look in the research files all the way back there is evidence of of many of the things that mainstream uh nutrition and mainstream medicine if there is such a thing are toting as being healthy maybe not maybe it's not healthy you know one of the things that's important about him is that and and he challenges me [54:07] constantly because there are things that we disagree about you know we've had arguments about whether to to supplement the diet with the central fat and he says but you know radiation decreases you know uh uh inflammation too I mean he's very thought provoking in terms of what is the balance here and what are the what is the what is the bill at the end of using these various things and he goes back and he's got the research to support his work it's not that he's some kind of guy who's making this up he he's he's researched a lot of this stuff but it's also his passion and his sense of love for people I mean he can be um you know in a personal conversation he can be sort of a little like annoyed with people but as soon as you start talking about this stuff I can feel how desperately he wants people to protect themselves and be healthy how much of a passion it is for him he works very hard 510-848-5732 there is a line open now if you were getting a busy give us a call now we um you know I I really think that this show has gotten a tremendous response [55:09] from listeners and part of it is because you are questioning authority like Ray Pete you're you're questioning and you want to know more about how to keep yourself healthy so if that's something that's important to you call in now get a copy of these three books for a pledge of 150 dollars you can have three of these books by uh uh Dr Ray Pete you know something wonderful that uh Robert Crayhill once said to me you know nutritionists who's been on a lot who's popular is that a truly intelligent mind will be able to contain conflicting ideas at the same time so whatever you read or hear from Ray Pete even if it kind of flips a switch or or you go huh that process is creative it will help you to dig deeper in yourself and to experiment and use your body as a laboratory not in an irresponsible way but in a way that's guided by knowledge so that's that's the only way to find health is to find that equilibrium and homostasis in each one of you and only with knowledge it's the only way you can do it 1-800-439-5732 or 510-848-5732 you can [56:16] pledge at the 60 dollar rate the 45 dollar rate if you can only afford to pledge 25 dollars then that then KPFA can use it it's very helpful for us to know what kind of response we get to the different shows that we put on the air here at KPFA right now we're getting a good response and we really need in fact you know I found out this morning that we haven't made out we're not getting we're not close to our overall goal we've got a ways to go so don't feel today if you haven't been able to call in you know while we're here talking on the mic that you can't still call in and support us it's very important that the station make its goal of four hundred thousand dollars before Wednesday so you know if you've been waiting and holding back now's the time to do it 510-848-5732 we got a line open yeah I'll tell you another thing that's interesting I was listening to the radio the other day and I heard Andrew Weil I know a lot of people like Andrew Weil but a woman called in this was on okay QED I guess I can mention that on the air and a woman called in said I have [57:17] bleeding fibroids and I don't want to have it's direct to me right and Andrew Weil said well yeah it sounds like you're estrogen dominant so the first thing to do is to eat more soy and get more exercise and then there are surgical techniques where they don't have to remove the the uterus and I'm sitting there going what happened to natural progesterone hello hello you know I mean it's like Andrew Weil talks about this stuff as if he invented it and that's not all the information it's not all the information
