---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: The Ten Most Toxic Things In Our Food
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aS3hGHHjeMQ
  # also https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-090901-the-ten-most-toxic-things-in-our-food.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aS3hGHHjeMQ
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-28"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
# filename date from toxinless.com url. YouTube date differs. 

added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-28"
---
 [0:00] Thank you, and welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of you who perhaps have never listened to our shows, they run every third Friday of the month from 7 to 8 p.m. and we are both licensed medical herbalists who train in England and graduated there with a degree in herbal medicine. We run a clinic in Garberville where we consult with clients about a wide range of conditions and recommend herbal medicine and dietary advice. And this month we are again very pleased and fortunate to welcome Dr. Ray Pete back to this show, and we'll be discussing the 10 most toxic things in our food. So welcome to Ask Your Herb Doctor, Dr. Ray Pete. Hello, thank you. Okay, I think what I should start by doing is opening up this show and just ask you to mention your academic background for those people who perhaps have never heard you. Okay, I used to teach linguistics and literature and such, but I got interested in nutrition [1:04] and other parts of biology and the chronology and such, so I went back to graduate school in 1968. I got a PhD taking most of my coursework in biochemistry and reproductive physiology. So it's mostly endocrine chemistry that I've been studying ever since. So for the last 45 years, Dr. Pete has been doing nutritional counseling and reproductive physiology and hormones, especially specializing in hormones. Is that correct, Dr. Pete? Yes, I was doing it somewhat in the early 60s, just from what I could learn incidentally without actually taking coursework in it. Wow, so we have a very experienced nutritionist, physiologist, endocrinologist joining us tonight. [2:06] Dr. Ray Pete, we're very happy to have you on our show tonight. Okay, I think what we wanted to go over this week for those people who've just tuned in are the 10 most toxic things in our food. Incidentally, I would say probably 50%!o(MISSING)f our interaction with clients consulting with us is based on their diet and changing their diet, modifying their diet in terms of getting them to cut out eating those foods that are negatively impacting their health and encouraging them to switch to other foods that are positively affecting their health. And probably the other 50%!i(MISSING)s herbs and or other preparations. So diet is very important. I think that adage, you are what you eat, is very appropriate. And so for tonight's show, people that are listening, you should probably take note. In England, there are very descriptive ingredients on all the foods that you'll buy. It almost [3:09] seems a bit ridiculous sometimes when you look at the wrapper of some foods because there's such a lot of information about the ingredients that it almost covers up the packets and the kind of advertising they're trying to do for the food. But it's very good. It lets people know exactly what ingredients are in the product. Everything has to be disclosed. And I think that the thing that will come out tonight when we cover the 10 products that are known to cause, I would say, disease or symptoms in people that may lead to disease, these things are very easy to spot on packaging in England. Whereas in America, there certainly is in the legislation allowable, what I would say, non-disclosure of certain ingredients. And Dr. Peep, when we go through these ingredients, you can perhaps expand on some of those things that are allowable by law to be included and not be detailed on the ingredient packaging. [4:10] So I know one of the main things that has come to light are the ever-increasing processing agents used in foods to the point now where food, if you want to call it food in some cases, can be basically broken down into a soup, re-homogenized, put into molds, pressed and formed into a certain type of food. And this is becoming, I would almost say, an art, not in the sense of being creative or artistic for itself, but for the sake of selling a product and turning a pretty non-edible food into an apparently edible and apparently good for your food. So the transglutaminases are a group of compounds that basically meet glue, if you like. So these are the agents that will bind meats together. So Dr. Peep, [5:14] would you, I know you have a lot of experience with the things that we're going to mention tonight, so I'd be very pleased if you would talk a little about the transglutaminase is what they do and their negative impacts on the foods that they're found in. The celiac disease has been pretty much explained as an overlap between part of the gluten protein molecule and a natural enzyme that we have in all of our cells and systems, the transglutaminase, which sticks proteins together. And this is induced by lots of things to increase its quantity or decrease it. For example, the ACE inhibitors for treating blood pressure have been discovered to block it to the extent that people's skin can fall off. The epidermis separates and [6:16] forms blisters and comes loose because of inhibiting the transglutaminase. But other things can intensify the action. Estrogen, for example, will cause premature hardening of the epidermis. The cells are flattened and keratinized under the influence of estrogen, which is antagonized by vitamin A. The uterus and the skin and the breast are places that especially involve these interactions of the hardening enzyme. Breast cancer and uterine cancer contain very large amounts of overproduction of the transglutaminase of certain kinds. And the antibody reactions that are involved in celiac [7:27] disease can inactivate the natural enzyme when it occurs. And, for example, scleroterma, the hardening and calcification of the skin and other membranes can apparently overlap considerably with celiac disease involving overactivation of the transglutaminase enzyme. Would you say that being related to estrogen that females would be greater risk? Yeah, all of the autoimmune diseases are much more frequent five or ten times for some of them in women compared to men. And I'm not sure how big a role transglutaminase plays in those, but that is one enzyme that is very susceptible to forming autoantibodies under the influence of estrogen. [8:35] Now these autoantibodies would be directed at attacking self? Yeah. Okay, so what kind of typically, what kind of foods will contain larger than normal amounts of these transglutaminases? Well, the worst thing about the use of these products is that they are industrially manufactured in microorganisms genetically modified. And for, I guess, about 30 years now organisms have been used for modifying foods. And when the Japanese pioneered the genetic modification of microorganisms to produce amino acids, people were thinking they were buying a pure chemical substance. But I ran across many people who said that they believed they almost died when they took a [9:42] pure amino acid preparation. And it's extremely difficult, if not impossible, to thoroughly purify anything made in a microorganism to the extent that it won't be allergenic. So the worst thing is that you're getting junk from microorganisms and industrial processes. And these can't be removed? Well, they're very difficult to remove. Yeah, as far as I know, it's impossible to absolutely purify them, but they purify them enough to satisfy government regulations. So they're taking bacteria, fungi, and yeast and genetically engineering them and genetically modifying them to produce various chemicals. And the transglutaminases are one of these things that get produced through genetic modification. Yeah, and they're becoming more and more popular with restaurant chefs to prepare things [10:50] individually rather than industrially. Yes, that was a very interesting article you sent us that was talking about the chefs, you know, wrapping chicken with bacon. And if they just apply the little bit of this meat glue, the bacon conveniently stuck to the little bit of chicken breast. So didn't have to use skewers or other. And they're getting very skillful. And, for example, soybean protein can be shaped and modified and glued together to resemble even the fibrous texture of meat. And scraps that are salvaged from the slaughterhouse can be glued together to look like meat and they can form it so that it looks like specific lamb chop cuts or pork chops or rib steaks or whatever. And they're very good convincing copies. [11:53] They don't want to waste anything if they can find a byproduct or a waste product and turn it into a product. That's good for business, isn't it? Yeah, probably for most people are exposed to the transglutaminases would be in the chicken or fish chunks that are very neatly formed to a certain shape. Or in delicatessums, they have a so-called roast beef or roast turkey that comes in very symmetrical tubes or loaves. Now, well, most of us here in Humboldt County, no, I don't know if I could say most of us in Humboldt and Mendo, but fortunately in California, we are blessed with a lot more natural food stores, but still it's very prevalent. These delicatessen meats are very prevalent in the stores in California and throughout the United States, even though they might be eaten in greater quantities throughout the rest of the U.S., it's quite frightening. [12:58] So basically the pressed meats, any meat that appears in a delicatessen that's being pressed into a certain shape and doesn't look as though it was often animal in that way. I know what you're saying, they do look very different. You may not notice it until you start looking at it properly, but they're the kind of meats that will be pressed together and then sliced conveniently. Or the chicken nuggets or the fish sticks. Yeah, I think some of the loaves that have been around for a hundred years or more, for example, head cheese, gelatin, natural gelatin was traditionally used to make a low-fat or fat, so that would be fine. And that's the way it was and unfortunately it's been changed. So just to recap on these transglutaminases, Dr. Pete, there's something that our body manufactures naturally and they have a purpose, but when we take them in increased numbers [13:59] through these processed foods, is that when it starts to cause the problems? Yeah, everything that we eat or inhale is processed by our immune system, sampling things that hit the intestinal membranes or that leaked through the membrane into the bloodstream. And so the immune system has to decide what to do to these extraneous materials and it can either accept them and allow them to circulate or it can organize a defensive attack against them. And it's the defensive inflammatory attack against the extraneous materials such as micro-organism proteins that can trigger the sometimes deadly allergic reactions. And it isn't strictly the proteins, the immunologist doctrine used to say that [15:08] it's proteins which are the allergens. But many carbohydrates or starch like gum materials are extremely allergenic and that has actually been known for 60 or 70 years with allergists are just now barely accepting the fact. Okay, you're listening to us here, Dr. R. K. M. U. D. Garble, 91.1 FM and from 7.30 or so until the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of the 10 most toxic things in our food. My name is Andrew Murray. My name is Sarah Johanneson Murray. And we are joined by guest speaker Dr. Ray Peat, endocrinologist, biochemist and physiologist, the number here if you live in the area is 9233911 or if you live outside the area the toll free number is 1-800-KMUD-RAD. I just want to quickly before we move on to the next food product or additive, Dr. Peat, could you just quickly mention the health benefits of gelatin? We mentioned the pressed meats [16:09] and the use of transglutaminase to achieve that where gelatin was always used and the gelatin is a very good product for you. Would you just say a few words about gelatin? Yeah, gelatin it constitutes about 50%!o(MISSING)f the protein in an animal and it has the feature of lacking tryptophan, cysteine and methionine which the muscle meats for example are extremely rich in tryptophan and cysteine and methionine. And those happen to inhibit the thyroid function, suppress metabolism and promote inflammation and simply eliminating methionine. Just one of those from the diet in animal experiments has increased the maximum lifespan about 40%!a(MISSING)nd adults have an extremely low requirement for tryptophan, cysteine and [17:11] methionine. They're used for growth processes. So it's very important for children? Yeah, so they're essential for kids to grow up but once you've achieved your growth you just need a very small amount to make new skin and antibodies and intestinal membranes and air and nails but you don't need the vast quantities that we get in the ordinary average proteins. So an adult 40 or 50 years ago nutritionists wondered how little old ladies could be so healthy just eating gelatin and toast because they thought of tryptophan and cysteine as essential amino acids but old people can essentially live on it with just a trace of the other things like bread and fruit. Good, so just another reminder for people that I think [18:17] probably because it just helps reinforce in my own mind I think this kind of conditioning that gelatin is a bad product, it's created from animal parts and these animal parts are not the things that shouldn't be in our diet but it's actually the reverse and actually gelatin is extremely important. Traditional diets made very efficient use of things like chicken feet, pigs ears and tails, beef and pork skin and so on really very pleasant and nutritious foods. And have been studies showing the anti-cancer effect of gelatin as well. Yeah anti-aging and anti-inflammatory it was used medically very widely up until about 50 years ago. Okay very good let's move on to the next food subject so we can try and get through as many of these as we can before the phone starts ringing. So how about gosh I say additive number two on the list, citric acid and ascorbic acid, the common ingredients that you'll [19:23] find perhaps on juices especially orange juice. I started running into people who had mysterious allergies in in Eugene. They tend to start with the pollen season and then continue with the grass seed field burning in the later summer but allergies were extremely common in Eugene but I found that some people had year-round allergies and they were consistently taking all of the anti-allergy supplements, panacinic acid, vitamin A, vitamin C and so on and I suggested that they try stopping those for a while to see what happens and I got essentially 100%!r(MISSING)esults in curing the local allergies and that was when I started doing a lot of nutrition counseling because [20:27] everyone was was so surprised to see that they had been allergic to the supplements and ascorbic acid that caused me to investigate the history of it. In 1953 when I worked in the woods the word went around that you could cure poison oak with ascorbic acid and I tried it myself and in just two or three days I completely recovered from a horrible case of poison oak and never caught it again. At that time it was very expensive to make and the pills on sale were only 50 milligrams. Several years later they developed new ways of manufacturing it. One of the processes Linus Pauling described as the lead room for making [21:36] sulfuric acid which is then the sulfuric acid is slightly contaminated with lead and other heavy metals then the corn starch is processed oxidized with this industrial sulfuric acid and ends up as a ascorbic acid containing quite a bit of heavy metal and with these new methods I found that when people were taking 500 or 1000 milligrams they would often develop cold symptoms when they took it rather than when they didn't take it and it apparently is irritating enough to the intestine that it causes endotoxin absorption and inflammation of the nose and throat and chest membranes and citric acid is manufactured by very similar methods [22:40] to ascorbic acid and they really shouldn't be considered to have anything to do with the natural ascorbic acid or citric acid person who can get very sick on two milligrams of synthetic ascorbic acid can eat 4,000 milligrams of natural ascorbic acid with no reaction at all. I think that's a very important point to say that actually even though they might call it the same product actually the industrial manufacture of it produces a very different effect. Yeah one researcher dissolved a 500 milligram tablet of commercial ascorbic acid in the liter of water and then put it in a machine that measures free radicals and he said it was like a storm of free radicals but he said it's amazing it doesn't that it was equivalent to something like 100 grads of no 600 grads of x-rays would take to produce that many free radicals in [23:47] the water. And here people are taking vitamin C for its antioxidant effect. Yeah he said it shows what tremendous antioxidant systems we have in our stomachs that we don't all die with the first 500 milligram dose. Wow okay so I guess let's move on because it's it's 727 now things about how about the gums we see things like guagum and locust bean gum and carob carob bean gum xanthan gum and carrageenan agar agar and these other similar gums and musilages how about those? I was reading the encyclopedia Britannica yearbooks for the 1947 or so and I saw that the FDA had declared that they were so allergenic they shouldn't be considered bit for use in food. And now they're in everything and now they're in everything most ice cream cottage cheese. [24:50] Yeah run through a list of the kind of foods that you'll find these gums and musilages in. Oh practically everything if they haven't figured out a way to get it into fresh eggs and oranges. It's not yet. And even if it doesn't say on the label that doesn't mean it's not in there right dr. B? Yeah and surprisingly even organic foods sometimes they don't have to list things like sulfites on the labels but I think they do have to list carrageenan but it can be in the food as a gum thickener for example and still be called organic but not long ago there was a publication of a person who died after having an alginate dental impression made [25:52] with anaphylactic shock. So they're very allergenic because an alginate would be like the agar agar right? Yeah and in the dental school at the University of Kansas students were practicing making alginate impressions on each other and out of 227 there were close to 50 of them who developed blisters in their mouth that took about five days to clear up. So just contact can in 20%!o(MISSING)f the people create blisters and then occasional unlucky people that can kill them. So these are really the things that if people that are listening to the show want to think about these things they're basically the thickeners so the kind of foods that we found in I mean ice cream believe it or not it's certainly present in ice cream. And organic whipping cream might notice. Okay whipping cream and how about cottage cheese? I think you've seen cottage cheese with [26:56] yeah organic valley and the clover cottage cheese those have it in there I'm a fan of cottage cheese and it was hard pressed to find one that didn't have it and finally I found Nancy's it's quite tart but it does have it in there it doesn't have the guargums in there and so what I eventually did start to make my own cottage cheese which is quite simple. So what are the foods let's just quickly mention other foods that people can just take a look at the ingredient panel and see for themselves so things like ice cream cottage cheese bread products cookies tortillas believe it or not any other foods that spring to mind. A lot of processed foods just read the labels. Yeah it's the unfortunate thing that processed foods contain a lot of the things that we're going to talk about tonight. Okay so how about let's quickly mention this because I know we've spent some time at length talking about them but poofers the polyunsaturated fatty acids are a pretty big problem. Yeah in natural foods I think there are two or three naturally occurring substances [28:02] that account for some natural disease and possibly all of the major degenerative diseases those are polyunsaturated fats, starches and sometimes an excess of iron in some natural foods if you eat that exclusively. For example if you ate liver every day accompanied by orange juice you would absorb a toxic amount of iron but just over the period of several years you can see the accumulation of the polyunsaturated fats in the tissues so that old animals have highly polyunsaturated brain tissue and all through the tissues it's more unsaturated and the long-lived [29:06] animals that are remarkable for living longer than you would expect are unusually saturated in their fats. Okay all right so we'll just basically mention these kind of things so poofers you'll find these polyunsaturates in things like corn oil soy oil fish oils to some extent and these are things that not so much fish oils but the corn and the other oils the things that are certainly used as frying oils are things that are basically fried chips or fries french fries and other products that are usually fried in these kind of oils so certainly things to look out for in terms of what they do Dr. Pete just quickly mention some of the some of the conditions that they can lead to um arthritis cancer dementia wrinkly skin susceptibility to sunburn [30:14] an article that just came out two months ago was looking at the pigment epithelium in the retina and they found that the linoleic acid in particular but all of the polyunsaturated fatty acids created an inflammatory process that basically accelerates the degeneration of the retina one of my newsletters a couple years ago went over that but this was just a couple months ago a new article showed that steric acid or saturated fatty acids don't do that and for many years some researchers on alcoholic liver disease have been showing that it's the polyunsaturated fats which cause cirrhosis and hepatitis when they drink alcohol [31:14] okay in india alcoholics who are in the butter ghee and milk eating regions don't get cirrhosis right okay so that the cirrhosis is not apparent at all in those in those people then there's purely those people that would drink or consume alcohol in the presence of polyunsaturated oils in their diets yeah and a group led by a man named Nanji has demonstrated that saturated fats can basically cure alcoholic cirrhosis and hepatitis wow even in the presence of them continuing to drink i think you said a 32 ounces vodka a day that wasn't Nanji's group but it was about 30 or 40 years ago someone did allow them to drink a quart of vodka every day and they still recovered when they had their saturated fats wow so naturally occurring saturated fats to recap [32:17] for our listeners are butter coconut oil palm oil if it's been separated because there's two portions of the palm oil beef and lamb fat and cocoa butter yeah so those are the saturated fats and the polyunsaturated fats to name a few more sesame seed oil or even the nuts and seeds in high quantities will provide a lot of polyunsaturated fats if you eat primarily nuts and seeds and chickens and pigs if they're fed on a high corn and soy diet which they all are in this country yeah their fats will be representative of what they were eating even our eggs because all chickens even if they're fed organic feed yeah they used to talk about the high saturated fat and cholesterol content of eggs but about 30 years ago someone decided to reanalyze and found that they're at that time they were already almost purely polyunsaturated wow so eggs aren't even [33:20] saturated don't even have saturated fat anymore because they feed the chickens corn and soy as the main primary food okay all right we're listening to ask you a doctor on k mu d garbable 91.1 uh at any time now until eight o'clock uh you're invited to call in many questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of the 10 most toxic thing in our food uh my name's Andrew my my name's Sarah Johanneson Murray and we're joined by guest speaker Dr Raymond Pete endocrinologist biochemist and physiologist the number here if you live in the area is 93 3911 or if you're outside the area 1-800-KMUD-RAD okay so let's let's go on to the next group of food products or food uh yeah in corporations into food uh or food things that make up the bulk of food in some people's diets yeah well Dr Pete you um kind of categorized saying three toxic things that are in our foods naturally occurring rather than as food additives or the polyunsaturates the starches and excess iron so let's talk about starches yeah um a man named [34:26] Gerhard Fulkeimer an immunologist in Berlin uh had apparently read some of the older studies about a hundred years ago and he tested on his medical students having them drink a solution about a cup full of corn starch stirred into water or a potato starch various vegetable starches and then he would draw a blood sample uh periodically and uh at first it was very clear that within about 10 or 15 minutes of drinking the starch solution you would find a lot of of the unprocessed starch pellets in the bloodstream the same size that they were when they were ingested and in some of these starches the diameter of the starch grain is as much as 100 [35:32] microns across 10 times as wide as the cells that line the intestine so how did it get through the process is called persorption but basically it just means they are pressed on one side and they pop out the other side the the cells are much more flexible than people imagine and you said 100 microns yeah and a red blood cells about seven that's a potato starch I think yeah since the capillaries are just a few microns across and a red cell at 10 or 11 microns has to bend a little bit to get through a capillary the starch grains can get if they're just the right size they could enter a capillary and get stuck but the bigger ones will plug the arterials before they get to the capillaries okay and so a full timer fed a high starch diet to mice and then slice [36:36] them up and found that every organ contained areas where cells have been killed by plugging up an artery with ischemia and that it accelerated the aging process by killing areas in the heart and brain and kidneys and so on so that's um causing heart disease then basically yeah and in his medical students after the first 15 to 30 minutes he tested the urine and found that the same unprocessed starch grains were showing up in the urine right through the kidney organelles and somewhat later he found it in the bile and even in the about an hour later he could find it in the cerebrospinal fluid wow okay we do have a I know [37:37] I want to explore this a little bit further but we do have a call on the line you're on the air hi how are you doing good and you good I'm doing well thank you I just want to thank you for your show it's a wonderful show and just really full of great information um and I'm calling about my I have a 13 year old daughter who has allergies and uh I've heard you mentioned it a couple of times and and uh you eat pretty well we we live locally and eat pretty good organic food probably about 15 percent is packaged you know just ice cream and bars maybe or potato chips are you know and good anyways um and so she had my daughter has these allergies that and the symptoms are stuffy nose and then some bumps sometimes on her face or sometimes on her legs um we had her tested for allergies and she tested positive for Johnson grass and some molds and then sensitivities to wheat dairy and corn we did an elimination diet and determined that that those seem to be the culprits and the dairy seemed to make her more stuffed up and the corn and wheat sort of generated the bumps [38:38] and I was just wondering if you know what what your how what your take on that is and uh it seemed to come on about when she between six and eight years old is when when these allergies started to manifest okay and how old is she now she's 13 about to be 14 so yeah okay well dr p did you uh do you want to comment on this uh with allergies it's similar to uh autoimmunity except not so serious uh the uh estrogen begins to rise especially in girls but in boys too around the age of seven or eight uh it's distinctly rising uh in in the average person and the estrogen changes the immune function tends to shrink the thymus gland and increase antibody production without the guidance of the thymus cells and that seems to be why it predisposes to allergies asthma [39:44] and autoimmunity asthma is now very well recognized to be increased by burst control pills menopausal estrogen or even the cyclic premenstrual rise in estrogen and partly that the effect of lowering the blood sugar because if your blood sugar falls uh the immune cells become much more reactive um an experimenter gave animals first he he ranked the food allergens from nuts down to uh some fruits and uh the uh mild allergens if he lowered the animal's blood sugar with a little insulin to 50 percent of normal the mildest allergens could kill the animals with an allergic reaction but if he infused glucose while exposing them to [40:47] even the worst allergens uh the worst allergens might give them the sniffles or red nose but nothing worse so uh just increasing glucose or decreasing it can make just a total difference in your sensitivity and since thyroid and progesterone are the main things that allow your liver to store adequate glycogen and estrogen is the main thing that interferes with that that's why the alert the uh sensitivities of various sorts come on around puberty well okay good all right so um you know that's probably another misconception that sugar is bad for you um just say a little bit more about sugar in terms of its physiological effects and and and maybe why the culture has been turned off of sugar and onto artificial sweetness oh the cultural thing is a really [41:52] complex story but um the white sugar um was already being blamed for causing diabetes uh 150 years ago and uh the treatment for uh diabetics was to absolutely forbid sugar which was a completely crazy idea a a french and an english doctor said that if they're losing a pound of sugar per day in their urine uh they're surely going to die sooner if they don't eat any sugar so he fed them up to uh 12 14 ounces of sugar uh he said the best white granulated sugar he could buy right and uh he cured his patients just by feeding them as much sugar as they were losing and the process of washing it uh eliminates most of the allergens so the finest white sugar [42:55] is really one of the safest foods available okay because i know there's a very big trend towards molasses sugar and the kind of brown golden sugars and okay there's another call on the line doctor Pete so let's call you on the air hi i have some questions about coconut coconut oil okay uh first of all could you explain the difference between uh the coconut oils and the coconut milk as far as what they are and their health effects and and and then the other question i have has to do with a recipes for coconut oil i find it works great in stir fries if you mix it with sesame oil or something but it doesn't really have a flavor that's conducive to you know eggs or things like that and i'm just wondering if you have any suggestions for recipes for coconut oil they that way would go well thank you um the coconut water is a pretty safe material uh when the coconut is uh relatively fresh the the liquid should be almost clear [44:04] and and very sweet and uh it it's uh been used medically um and it's uh surprisingly low in allergenicity but the the white material that is sold as milk is an industrial manufactured substance made out of uh basically emulsifying some of the solids and oil with with uh the liquid from the coconut another source of guar gum i think it's in coconut milk and the the solids in coconut uh are very starchy and uh can be pretty allergenic so i recommend using the highly filtered deodorized form of coconut oil which is extremely cheap currently it's about 50 dollars for a five gallon pail of it where the aromatic delicately scented ones that [45:08] haven't been filtered some people just a teaspoon of that can make some people very sick from an allergic reaction to the starches that are left in it and if it's for very well filtered high quality oil uh it tastes fine for frying chicken i've been frying chicken in coconut oil for many years and it it works with eggs but it isn't as tasty as butter for for some foods like eggs that what's available here is uh the coconut oil which is like a clear solid like a wax almost and and that's what i've been using for stir fries and it doesn't seem to have quite the flavor that goes well with some recipes and then there's the coconut milk that you buy in the cans that you use in in curries in Thai style food so that's what's available there have been some studies of in even in the Philippines in which uh the people who used milk [46:14] traditionally were having health problems so it's even in the traditional form it is probably not a very good food to use the yeah you sent us an article Dr. Pete that was showing an increased risk of breast cancer in women in the Philippines who ate a lot of uh coconut milk in their food recipes but um just to answer your question caller the Chautauqua sells the tropical traditions expeller press coconut oil and i think you've um had some of that too Dr. Pete that seems to be the best one i've found that doesn't have the coconut flavor therefore it doesn't have the allergenicity that could be provided by the coconut and it's um relatively tasteless and it doesn't taste like anything basically it's the non-organic expeller press tropical traditions and they do sell it at Chautauqua i don't know if you live in uh some or no other novel what i see available is this this uh waxy stuff it looks like oil i mean it looks like the pure oil and uh but there [47:19] i guess they're i find confusion about the oil the health effects of the oil which i've heard you recommend quite a bit and it seems that make me flush and raise my body temperature sometimes and and the coconut milk which sometimes i think has the same effect um but i don't cook with it that often because those recipes are so tasty that i overeat so anyway i'm trying to try to figure out how to work it into my diet if it really has uh has these positive effects in a way that makes it appetizing thank you thank you very cool one one of the very pleasant ways to use the deodorized oil is to emulsify it a little bit of egg yolk is all it takes if you warm the oil and the milk just a touch of of egg yolk will allow it to emulsify about 50 percent oil to milk or whatever concentration you want and you can make ice cream or cheesecake all kinds of buttery creamy [48:27] consistently foods using instead of cream or cream cheese you can use the coconut oil emulsified okay very good thank you for that let's move on i think i wanted to cover the starches a little bit more but let's move on to the next ingredient the gmo microbial enzymes and the vegetarian rennet these are kind of cheese replacements we talk a little bit about rennet and why natural rennet from a cow's a young calf's stomach is not being used now but it's being genetically modified on yeast and other microorganisms and how this has contributed to allergies in people and people that say they can't eat cheese etc i think it's the trace allergens parts of the the fungus or the bacteria aspergillosis is a very serious disease and people who work in some of these enzyme factories are exposed to dust from the microorganisms [49:34] and develop allergies of various sorts but the regulators assume that the people who eat the stuff aren't going to have the same sort of reactions aspergillosis that's farmer's lung isn't it they get it from moldy moldy straw and it's another respiratory preoccupational disease for farmers yeah and all all of the organisms used in manufacturing amino acids or proteins or enzymes all of them have their risk of the impurities being left in the product and the food producers are being pressured in various ways to give up the natural material and buy their stuff in a can and do it in a like they were in a chemical [50:39] lab rather than a kitchen uh it's many kinds of pressure are are affecting the food supply so that people are are coming to believe that the industrial way is necessary you can see the government and commercial websites that say these things are necessary for high quality food if if you're going to keep the food on the shelf for a a month or two maybe it's necessary but for example Nancy's yogurt used to be Nancy's cottage cheese I mean used to be natural cottage cheese and the way cottage cheese was always made was to drain the curd and salt it and draining it left the curd free of lactic acid but a couple of years ago someone convinced the Nancy's yogurt [51:45] people to start using what they call a dressing consisting of of lactic acid than something else to dry milk powder oh yeah to give the cottage cheese a very long shelf life lactic acid suppresses the growth of organisms but it's also just as toxic to the people who eat it as it is to the organisms that are being suppressed by it it very quickly can stimulate the whole inflammatory chain reaction the same as the polyunsaturated fat and if that inflammation is continued chronically then it increases fibrosis and the same as as radiation any of these chronic inflammation eventually increase the risk of cancer and we're told it's good for us lactic acid is great very for your intestinal health right [52:50] that's what we're told we have a collar on the line we better be very quick though because it is four minutes to and I do want to give people some more information about Dr. Ray Pete so it is going to be for about two minutes unfortunately but you're on the air all right I'll take a second I just wanted to ask what do you think of olive oil and canola oil and I'll go up here okay thank you talk to me in in small quantities like a teaspoon for a full or so of olive oil it's fine and safe because it's only 10 percent of the toxic polyunsaturated fats canola oil is very high in the polyunsaturated and it it got its reputation as being a healthful oil about 30 years ago when they learned to lower the erusic acid content but Han Selye demonstrated that it [53:50] is not the erusic acid which was causing it to cause heart damage and and other degenerative processes it was the linoleic acid itself the so-called essential fatty acid which was causing death of heart cells and he showed that just by adding steric acid from cocoa butter he could neutralize the toxic effect on the heart so it's the ratio and canola oil it has a very high content of the dangerous polyunsaturated thank you for that Dr. I just want to summarize the rennet with referring to the cheeses the natural sources of rennet that have been used for thousands of years are animal rennet or non-animal natural sources are fig juice nettles thistle's mallow creeping charlene cardoon thistle vinegar lemon juice are just letting the milks out of form occurred artificial sources of rennet are enzymes vegetarian rennet microbial enzymes and they [54:54] are either derived from molds so they're very allergenic or they're genetically engineered so vegetarian rennet folks is not a safe uh rennet okay well we apologize for not mentioning Dr. Ray Pete's contact details at the end of last month's after your hyper doctor uh on the we had the program on the dangers of medical radiation uh it was very interesting and unfortunately uh Dr. Pete wasn't mentioned there as the contact details so he can be reached on his website he has a website and it's www.raypeat.com that's r-a-y-p-e-a-t dot com and we can be reached toll free on one eight eight eight w-b-m herb for consultations or further information and once again thank you Dr. Pete for joining us okay thank you it's always a pleasure well we've probably only got halfway through the food ingredients unfortunately it's a it's a unfortunate thing about most people they uh yeah don't often think that much about what they are putting into their bodies and people should [55:57] just take more time to look at the ingredient panels on the foods that they eat because you will find a lot of hidden material that does cause problems so basically if i take a good look at what you're eating so thank you to all of you who listen regularly and those who tuned in this evening