---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Further Discourse on Sugar's Importance
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfAMIPtW8uo
  mirrors: 
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/kmud-111021-sugar-myths-2.mp3
    - https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-111021-sugar-myths-2.mp3
    - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wsI8I-Iy6iQ
    - https://askyourherbdoctor.com/audio/2011%20Sugar%20II%20Oct%202011.mp3
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/kmud-111021-sugar-myths-2.vtt
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfAMIPtW8uo
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-26"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-26"
ray-peat-rodeo:
  prev-paths:
    - /sugar-myths-two
---
 [0:00] Hi and welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. And my name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of you who perhaps have never listened to our shows, which run every third Friday of the month from 7 to 8pm, we're both licensed medical herbalists who trained in England and graduated there with a degree in herbal medicine. We run a clinic in Garberville where we consult with clients about a wide range of conditions and we recommend herbal medicines and dietary advice. Well, again, I just want to reiterate that it's become increasingly obvious over the last few years if you really want to get the point across, you cannot just mention it once or twice. But that's a remind people of the same subject and bring out the science and the other proof, if you like, of what it is that is counter-culture. It is a good way to refresh people's memories that often what they hear [1:02] and what they see is not always the way it is. And actually there's more to it than meets the eye and that it's up to us individually to take responsibility for our own actions and our own decisions by seeing the broader picture and finding the information that is out there freely available. If only we would look, I often end the end of the show with the phrase to those who have ears, let them hear. Well, for those of us who have eyes and ears, let us see and hear what there is out there. Again, the program will be, yeah, what's the word, spiced up. And I can't say that in any other ways than we're very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peake with us here again for this month's show and to bring his wisdom and his research to bear upon the subjects that which don't always seem to be the way that we would have been told the way they are. But [2:06] like I said, you repeat the question or repeat the solution more than once and time and time again, it suddenly begins to become more of a reality and especially when it's backed up with science to counter the supposed science that wants to tell us the other way is the way it is. So Dr. Peake, thank you so much for joining us again. Hi. First of all, I think as always, there are people here who just have never heard us before. Maybe they haven't heard of you either, but I'm not so sure about that. Would you like to just describe your academic and research background for the benefit of any new listeners? Okay. Following on what you were just talking about, my academic career went from linguistics to biology and there was a continuity of a sort from studying grammar and the structure of language to thinking about strictly biological [3:12] questions. In linguistics, I was concentrating on how culture interacts with the structure of language. I was seeing the evolution over hundreds and hundreds of years of understanding in the culture as being what shapes the way the grammar itself of language works. And for various reasons, I switched over to biology by thinking to understand the brain better, the brain as the organ that carries culture and language. And so when I got into biology and went from brain work to reproductive physiology, I was still interested in those questions of how the context interacts with the structure. The focus on language made me see that there is an identity between the [4:18] surrounding culture and the physical structure of the language and then going from the brain to other aspects of physiology. I saw that the environment is a part of the organism. So that accounts for my orientation in biology that it's really concentrating on the interaction moment by moment between the animal and the environment. How I think before we get started on to a continuation of last month's subject which were of surrounding sugars and the debunking of the cholesterol heart disease myth. This month's show is going to be a continuation of last month's show Dr. Pete on the sugars and how beneficial they are just to highlight the particular sugars that we're going to be [5:24] looking at that are beneficial without doubt and there's plenty of research to back it up as fructose as a fruit sugar. But before we get into that, I think it would be useful if for no other reason than for me to understand that you've spent 20 to 25 years or 30 years researching the areas of academic science that you're involved in doing your PhD which was around hormones and their interactions. How often do you find? I think it's more like 40 years. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Okay. Well 40 years. That's a compliment Dr. Pete. He thinks you're younger than you are. Okay. How often do you find that the mainstream science conflicts with the evidence that you find? Well that was a constant almost daily experience in my attending lectures. [6:26] I was really surprised any time a professor said anything that I thought really related meaningfully to the biological facts. There was a book that was used as a text in genetics. It was called Classical Papers in Genetics and reading through that I couldn't find any case in which the facts were honestly presented. It was really a little handbook of ideology and my experience with the academic science people was that they are very heavy on ideology, very light on facts. I almost never saw a science professor in the science library and I spent many years every day reading in the library. I think I saw maybe four professors, [7:31] two of them I saw more than one. All right. Well let's get into the meat of this month's continuing program on sugars and again just to reiterate the fact that the gosh the lies I think it was Adolf Hitler said that if you you have to make a lie colossal enough and repeatedly often enough for people to really believe it as truth. So it's not just small lies but sometimes colossal lies that are put out there that are certainly things we have to watch out for when we hear whatever we hear. So let's go on to the sugars. You for the benefit of our listeners you have a buy I think it's bimonthly newsletter isn't it that you produce? Yeah okay and the last newsletter actually we just received it it was on sugars and there was I know that you've always your father had diabetes and that was a personal [8:36] experience upon which you were interacting. There was a statement in your one in your newsletter towards the last part of it that the addition of fructose to glucose during infusion intra-portal infusion increased the neck glucose uptake even when the insulin secretion was compromised as in the diabetics. Yeah they refer to that as a catalytic property of fructose it it doesn't just increase the metabolism and uptake of glucose but it increases the whole metabolism of the animal in several types of experiments they've seen a 50 percent increase in the whole metabolic rate and that's basically why I'm so interested in the effects of fructose because the the research I did at university had to do with aging and oxidative metabolism [9:46] and the the perversion of oxidative energy production with aging and with various toxins hormones and unsaturated fats and so on and the thyroid hormone is what basically distinguishes humans from fungus and bacteria and such the the higher development of the brain goes the more oxidative energy production is needed and the development of a baby's brain prenatally is very closely tied to the amount of glucose it metabolizes you restrict the glucose to the baby and the brain is smaller you feed it extra glucose the brain is bigger. Okay so can I just sorry to interrupt you there dr. Pete but for our listeners just go over a little bit of sugar [10:48] science here everybody's familiar with a white sugar and that's sucrose which is half fructose because you've mentioned fructose now and also half glucose and then all fruits contain approximately the same ratio of fructose and glucose as white sugar it's half half fructose half glucose and then other sources of carbohydrates like grains beans starches any other carbohydrate like food bread pasta potatoes root vegetables they are almost all glucose so they're they're devoid of the fructose it's easy to remember fructose because it sounds kind of like fruit yeah and the only place fructose slows down glucose is in the absorption from the intestine the fructose itself is is slow to be absorbed compared to glucose and so if you eat starch like white rice or white bread [11:52] you'll get a very sharp increase in the amount of glucose in the blood that'll stimulate insulin to handle that rising glucose and that stimulates cortisol to prevent the reverse reaction from too much insulin and not enough sustained glucose but when you eat sugar the the glucose half is broken off and the fructose lags a little bit in being absorbed and that's why it's a safer sugar for diabetics fructose or white sugar or fruits yeah and so the glucose from the fructose gets absorbed and then the smaller amount of of fructose coming in accelerates the absorption of the glucose by the various tissues not just liver but brain, kidney, heart, everything and so it's fulfilling some of insulin's [13:01] responsibility without having to call on the insulin but it actually under some circumstances can inhibit the release of insulin so that it prevents the spiking of insulin and takes care of insulin's work and relative absence of insulin so because again to explain to our listeners a diabetic problem is that they have high sugar a lot of sugar in their blood and they need their cells to pick that up and when the fructose is combined with the glucose the fructose is actually helping the cells pick up the glucose as well as the fructose is that what you're explaining Dr. Pete yeah it stimulates the cells to take up glucose very much the way insulin does and in fact you can't distinguish the effects on some of the crucial enzymes that handle the absorption and use of glucose fructose and the pyruvic acid that it turns into stimulate the enzymes [14:08] that oxidize pyruvic acid just the same way insulin stimulates that same enzyme so they're really one replaces the other perfectly and if a diabetic eats a whole grain or beans or any other starchy type of foods then they don't have the same ability to use that sugar because it's mainly in the form of glucose and so then they end up with elevated sugar numbers and elevated insulin to handle that or not if they're insulin dependent but the funny thing I think that just to go back to this counterculture is diabetics are told avoid orange juice avoid sugar white sugar and eat whole grains and that's exactly the opposite of what I've seen work in our clinic with diabetics because when diabetics avoid the grains and the starches even if they're whole [15:11] grains and beans and root vegetables and they eat the honeys the white sugars and the fruits their sugar numbers become much more manageable I mean yeah it was in 1874 that someone first published a paper on the fact that fructose is metabolized by diabetics where glucose isn't and at the same time people were applying the use of sucrose therapeutically for diabetics but after the publication of the paper showing that diabetics can metabolize fructose it was fairly common for people to recommend use of fructose or sucrose to diabetics rather than plain glucose it's just I think another thing too that happens with sugary foods is you don't often find a food that just has white sugar or honey in it it's usually a sugar or honey [16:14] with a carbohydrate and that's where I think the diabetics get into problems with eating so-called sweet foods and worse than that the polyunsaturated fats are very often combined as shortening in the bakery products for example right okay so that brings us to our good example and our bad example of sugar and fat because then of course the sugar needs to be eaten with a fat as well as a protein which is what one of our listeners asked me specifically to talk about tonight the enzyme I mentioned before pyruvic dehydrogenase which is activated by insulin or by fructose to handle the oxidation of glucose that happens to be activated also by saturated fatty acids but it's inhibited by polyunsaturated fatty acids and the big overall diet change in the [17:17] U.S. over the last 40 years has been contrary to what a lot of people are saying it's been a slight decrease in sugar a slight increase in starch consumption and a big seven percent increase in added fats to foods and most of those fats are unsaturated because of the the fear of saturated fats so and the cheapness now it's the cheapness isn't it the corn oil and safflower oil all those unsaturated fats canola everything but every liquid vetched oil apart from olive oil basically is right on mass is hectares and hectares already in the 1960s the polyunsaturated fats were recognized to be the diabetogenic factors they interfere with the ability to oxidize glucose it's more recently that they've seen that they specifically inhibit the enzyme which is activated [18:22] by fructose and insulin and don't they also destroy the pancreatic beta cells that produce the insulin oh yeah it every place you look the polyunsaturated fats contribute to diabetes that's that's a good point in question the dr. p what's what's your opinion on the possibility of regenerating islet cells in the pancreas our sugar itself sucrose is known to stimulate the regeneration of beta cells wow that was in my newsletter about a year ago describing the early treatment of diabetes with with glucose and then looking at the new in vitro studies in which sugar stimulates the regeneration and polyunsaturated fats kill the beta cells and sugar often gets the blame for many other things that the polyunsaturated [19:24] fats do such as the glycation of hemoglobin which they measure as an hba1c but most of the glycation so-called is really the oxidative breakdown fragments of the polyunsaturated fats so a person's hba1c thing for example could be lowered if they avoided all poly polyunsaturated oils yeah yeah because then they'll be able to use their sugars better so we came up with a really bad example of a way to eat sugar and that's a doughnut fried in um colnola oil or sunflower oil or corn oil hold that hold that thought a minute because i know you probably go straight on to just want to let people know that you're listening to ask your own doctor on k-media gavel 91.1 fm and from 7 30 until the end of the show data clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated so this month's part two subject on sugar and dr p is our guest speaker [20:26] and so sarah you'd like to carry oh i better give the number up sorry i'm rushing ahead a number if you live in the areas 923 3911 and if you live outside the area it's 1 800 km ud rad that's 1 800 5 6 8 3 7 2 3 so a really bad example of be you know a doughnut made from white flour with um also lots of fat in the doughnut i think doughnut mixtures also have fat so probably would be shortening which would be a corn oil hydrogenated corn oil or something and then fried in a liquid vegetable oil so you not only have pure glucose but then you have um pure polyunsaturated fatty acids that can't that are blocking your cells using any of that pure glucose and a good example dr Pete said was um ice cream with fruit fresh fruit so there you go there's a saturated fat and the fruit took the fruit dose and a practical application okay well another question for you dr Pete um also there was a another part in your article that caught my attention and um [21:32] it was surrounding fat peroxidation so oxidation and of uh of fats involved in the degenerative disease process um despite the fructose increasing the production of uric acid and you mentioned uric acid was a endogenous that is we manufactured ourselves um anti-inflammatory it's considered to be our main uh antioxidant sorry and uh most of the uh inflammatory signals come from oxidative breakdown products and so it's our basic antioxidant and a major anti-inflammatory factor but the breakdown of these polyunsaturates or the oxidation of those has a very strong inflammatory effect is that is that uh yeah yeah but the um the fish oil type uh breaks down much faster than [22:37] the seed oils and by the time it gets from your food into your bloodstream there is so much uh free radical activity that it poisons some of your enzymes involved in immunity and it's the anti-immune suppressive effect that uh people see as an anti-inflammatory effect of the fish oil type of fats the other the seed oil fats don't even have that temporary toxic apparent benefit flat out inflammatory okay and then um they the last uh the last point that caught my attention was that and this is a specific uh piece of experimentation that conclusively showed this effect and that was that people that were given a 300 uh calorie drink [23:38] containing uh either glucose or fructose or oj orange juice separately so 300 calories containing glucose or fructose or orange juice those that received the glucose had a large increase in the oxidative inflammatory stress uh producing reactive oxygen species and a product uh nuclear factor Kappa beta but it was absent in those receiving the 300 calorie drink with just fructose or just oj um yeah that has lots of ramifications uh including the immune system which they were looking at at some white blood cells but bone cells are very responsive to the difference in carbohydrate and uh about uh 35 years ago someone fed different groups of rats uh either a high starch [24:40] diet or a high uh sugar diet I think was sucrose in that case and gave two of the groups vitamin D deficient diet and another group got the vitamin D and the standard uh food ration and uh after that they had been on that diet for a while they tested the strength of their bones and the vitamin D diet uh deficient diet that got starch had the rickets type bones poorly uh calcified uh weak and uh basically defective as you would expect from a vitamin D deficiency but those on the high sucrose diet without vitamin D had strong well calcified bones [25:40] surprisingly it apparently was the increased carbon dioxide production from the catalyzed higher metabolic rate uh and the the carbon dioxide is largely responsible for proper calcification of bone so does there's a higher co2 content actually um allow extra cellular calcium to move into into bone stores yeah the first bone material laid down is calcium carbonate even though later it turns to a phosphate compound and uh in vitro experiments showed that you can have an acidic condition as long as it's based on carbon dioxide as the acid and have strong bones and the same amount of lactic acid p8 will cause [26:43] interruption and dissolution of the bones so it's the the fact that starch tends to produce shift towards lactic acid rather than carbon dioxide now this is why you say that um oxidative exercise like aerobics or jogging is bad for you because the um the stress that that causes is uh counterproductive to calcium uh being laid down um yeah uh exercise coach has taken about 40 years for the science to get to the trainers but uh the east europeans were the first ones to uh limit the training their athletes did and they they won a lot of olympic medals by uh under training because the whole the whole aerobic exercise puts too much stress on the body yeah the um testosterone goes down and the cortisol goes up and you lose tissue [27:49] and speed and coordination so do they do some a different type of exercise for their athletes yeah cutting the exercise short before the lactic acid rises enough to poison the the right hormones which i mean isn't that long in aerobic exercises it's like a couple minutes yeah a minute or two is enough a minute or two at a high heart rate then followed by a break to let the heart rate go back down i mean is that yeah and to get the lactic acid under under control because it turns on the stress hormones that destroy your muscles and nerves and bones and the other downside of the aerobic exercise is that you constantly bring up is that the uh you deplete your own co2 stores yeah yeah by taking taking too much oxygen which is another point that oxygen's not always a good guy i know we need to live to breathe etc but it's not the [28:50] thing we need to be striving for i think most people that we see in we look at labs that most people co2 is fairly low yeah the typically well trained long distance runner has been found to have basically defective lung function because the chronic elevation of the lactic acid causes the thickening of the air sacs of making the path of oxygen diffusion longer and and so it poorly oxygenates their blood wow so is it a type of fibrosis from inflammation or is it different mechanism um no just i think water logging right okay okay it does the lactic acid does lead first to the water logging inflammation and eventually the fibrosis okay well you're listening to ask your doctor on kmud garbable 91.1 fm and from now until the end of the show at eight o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated [29:52] to this month's topic on sugars the number if you live in the areas 9233911 or if you live outside the area it's 1-800-568-3723 that's 1-800-kmud rad okay so to carry on to carry on with sugars then the uh i think what we probably should bring out again is that the um the brown sugar movement so the the hip and trendy replacement to what was maligned early on as the white sugar by many people so it was a hip thing to produce brown sugar raw sugar molasses etc etc and it was a health food replacement making a better replacement for the white sugar that we always had before but say a little bit of brown sugar because brown sugar itself is not particularly good is it in an extreme situation of poverty the the crude brown foods brown bread brown rice [30:59] brown sugar or molasses those are definitely important sources of nutrients but when people start eating more fat and protein they can and to lose the nutrients in those and they're gaining some freedom from toxins and inflammation when they reduce those brown substances uh in molasses for example it turns brown partly because the sugars are being caramelized the minerals uh combined with heat and oxygen uh for dehydrating the juices the minerals catalyze the oxidation and and you get reactions combining uh sugar molecules and changing them [32:00] and these become to various degrees toxic or pro-inflammatory allergenic and even even potentially carcinogenic is that that's correct huh yeah yeah I mean we've all heard about the carcinogenic effect of a a burnt piece of toast or um too many eating too many french fries that are really browned and it's the same with brown sugar it's a caramelization of the starch or I mean of the sugar that causes the um allergenic and carcinogenic effect okay we've got our first caller on the air so let's take our first caller um hi I just I heard you talking about sugar my son's 34 down he drives me nuts about his sugar intake because I think sugar is really bad for you and um when we go out like to have a breakfast with something he will pour the sugar holder into his coffee and I said you know don't you know that it causes diabetes or the effects diabetes and your teeth [33:05] your um and he's had kidney stones but whatever I say isn't gonna hit him and he just you know keeps using sugar so uh I don't understand because I didn't raise him particularly on a sugar-heavy diet I I believed in natural foods and everything and so um is there any information or where where I can get some that would influence him about the bad things about sugar um there's a natural tendency of people who have a some hormone imbalance especially hypothyroidism uh-huh which makes your liver unable to store glycogen effectively um it causes a natural craving for sugar and glycogen just so you know there is a storage form of sugar uh-huh you you you take in dietary sugars and then it gets converted to glycogen it's a way [34:06] of your body to store it out for later on uh-huh okay um I was always uh extremely uh craving sugar um so was I generally eating a lot until I took thyroid uh I was um probably about 40 years old when I first took thyroid uh-huh and um I suddenly had no more sugar cravings I could go eight hours without uh getting terribly hungry or shaky or uh thinking about sweet things uh-huh and um well that's good to know um well um I'll just have to tell him you know he's gotta ask his doctor he said he's been tested for uh diabetes and he doesn't have it but you know uh it's unhealthy what he's doing pouring sugar into you know coffee and I I don't know if that's just to irritate me or you know but it's obviously he doesn't care and he thinks it's cool and then and still he's had [35:08] kidney stones and aren't those influenced by sugar um no I don't think so no okay only in the sense negative I can hardly hear you doctor when you aren't eating enough minerals for example if you let the sugar displace sources of calcium and magnesium and protein then you do tend to form stones the um parathyroid hormone and other inflammatory things tend to create mineralization of soft tissues and formation of of stones uh in the kidneys bladder and and uh gallbladder but what would he what would be the test that would give him the information he needs well a vitamin d vitamin d serum test for vitamin d3 uh-huh is one relevant thing I've had that [36:12] well um and mine came out all normal and everything so uh I don't know but anyway that's good information I will pass it on to my son and the fact that he's adding that white sugar to his coffee uh-huh it's probably protective because coffee lowers your blood sugar and if you have this pure black coffee you'll actually end up blowing your blood sugar and if he's someone who's craving a lot of sugars uh-huh that's probably why he's just like figured it out that if he has coffee he better have sugar with it because it makes him feel better yeah I take my coffee black so I don't know it's really you know and it's um it's going to be easier for his body to use the white sugar than it would be a big pile of pancakes but he's probably just craves all types of um sugars whether they come from starches or sugar is he quite lean no he's not and he works really really hard uh but he's stocky uh he doesn't I don't know I know he likes ice cream and stuff but it's mainly what I just seemed dump like a sugar shaker into coffee and we could be in an organic restaurant or whatever [37:18] and having healthy foods and he's still got to have that sugar fixed and um well his body's obviously telling him something so yeah he could get his thyroid his thyroid checked and his vitamin D checked and that would be a good start yeah that would be a good start well thank you so much for your help I really appreciate it you're very welcome all right bye bye bye okay well we have another caller on the air so let's take this one you're on the air hello hi you're on the air hi guys this is um tasha hi tasha hello um well first I just want to really uh tell you how much I appreciate you guys bringing this information and um to the airways and I really want to encourage the listeners to really open listen with an open heart and kind of put you know everything you've heard your whole life in the background and just take in the information that has it come because um you know this isn't readily available information and um but to get back to on that [38:21] previous caller you know about the whole sugar with the coffee and whatnot maybe you could uh expound a little bit more on the whole key of balance and how when you do eat consumed sugar how it is important to have it with the proper amount of fat and protein to slow down you know the release of the sugar and the sugar and vice versa if you're going to have protein you need the sugar to help uh the body utilize all be able to utilize and break down the protein has you know what I'm saying exactly so anyway I just wanted to um encourage you guys to clarify that even more so that people really has they do to tune in uh even if they can't tune into the middle of the show and you they hear all these great things about sugar but to go back to the balance and also um uh you know I think that's right how you were explaining to add sugar into the coffee to help boost up your blood sugar you know and all of that but anyway I just want to thank you guys a lot [39:25] okay dr p thank you thank you for your call tessian yeah the um but doctor can you explain sorry andor can you explain why it's so important to have a protein when you have a protein to have it with a fruit or honey or sugar because of the blood sugar lowering effect of the protein you have the amino acids in the protein themselves are a strong stimulants of the insulin secretion and when you don't take in sugar the insulin to dispose of the protein will lower your blood sugar and to prevent the blood sugar going down you tend to produce either adrenaline or cortisol or both and uh the um if your liver didn't have the glycogen stored to release glucose under the influence of adren adrenaline then you depend on cortisol to keep your blood sugar steady and [40:32] cortisol activates the conversion of protein to sugar and fat and so you've destroyed a big part of the protein that you've just eaten I've seen people who were eating a couple of pounds of meat a day who were having signs of protein deficiency and getting fat so to handle the protein efficiently you need the glucose to make sure that your insulin isn't lowering your blood sugar you need either glucose or fructose to steady your blood sugar and the fat does several things the saturated fat works with fructose and insulin to handle your oxidation of the glucose and the fat also slows the absorption so that you don't get a surge of [41:34] fat or a surge of glucose in your blood for eating say a coffee with sugar and the coffee like the glucose stimulates your metabolic rate and both of those by increasing your metabolic rate are going to increase your general nutritional requirements minerals and all of the vitamins have to be adequate and if you substitute the sugar for things like fruit milk cheese shellfish eggs and so on then you're very likely to become deficient biotin and vitamin b6 and panathenaic acid and selenium and copper are things that are among the first to become deficient if you try to run on too much coffee and sugar not enough food so yeah as much as you know the [42:44] fructose helps people's cells pick up the sugar and there's all these anti-inflammatory effects from eating fructose or fruit or honey or sugar everything has to be kept in a balance is what I guess you're trying to say here dr. Pete with the correct nutritional balance of proteins and good saturated fats coconut oil and butter otherwise you will suffer a deficiency from either too much protein or too many sugars yeah okay we're just so people can get a list of some of the top fructose sources that also don't just have fructose they have fructose and glucose but they're things that you'd expect like dates dates are 32%!f(MISSING)ructose they contain b vitamins potassium calcium and iron I know dr. Pete you're not too big on iron because irons are particularly inflammatory iron and but when it's with the other minerals that does help protect you from overloading on iron yeah we're not talking about just over iron consumption okay and then [43:48] raisins raisins in the same kind of group as dates they're 30 30%!f(MISSING)ructose antioxidant rich and then agave you know now what do you think about agave because agave nectar has been touted as a very good replacement and it actually contains about 43%!f(MISSING)ructose as well as the fructans the polymers of fructose and they're also found in asparagus and artichokes yeah if the fact that they mentioned the fructans I think probably means that it's being produced enzymically from the core of the agave plant rather than from the juice because that's a waste product if you like is it yeah of tequila production yeah so using spent raw material and so doffy can you give us some examples of some good food combining for protein fat and good sugar oh i'm out of fruit and cheese would be a basic thing for snacks as well as meals grapes and cheese [44:58] actually we have another caller on the air so let's take this other caller you're on hi yes great show and um first uh i wanted to mention dr pete whatever you did one that woman said that she couldn't hear you i haven't heard you better on this show uh than when whatever you did was that so keep doing it i know michael mcaspill does everything he can to keep everyone's levels good but i have a little trouble hearing to start with and sometimes it is hard to hear your wisdom and and i really appreciate what you bring to the air um you know it's come up in recent news reports that it seems like under constant attack are the natural substances on the earth what was rossum foods being attacked by the food rallies and the federal forces going in and dumping this raw milk and then what's going on recently with medicinal marijuana here after obama told us it was going to be left alone if it was legal in the states where it was legal and i understand phoenix and states all along the west in colorado and of course right here in our own backyard have been attacked and it always amazes me that the people [46:02] who put out chemical concoctions cooked up in a lab somewhere call it vioxx say it's safe and kill a bunch of people before it's taken off the market but nobody goes to jail uh versus the people who are taking to jail because their food is inherently dangerous when it's natural i don't get it but you guys are on the front lines and i really really appreciate you bringing it back to mother nature and bringing it home because this is provided for us and you all are explaining what it does as it's been provided for us so thank you and um i wanted to ask specifically about dextrose dextrose from what i gather in my research is basically that spoonful of sugar that helps the medicine go down because i don't see dextrose mixed in with much of anything else but medicine and i'm curious as to the function and purpose of dextrose what it's really all about and uh also since steve jobs recently passed in pancreatic cancer was uh related to that i understand he [47:04] used to stay up for days at a time working on his invention a lot of coffee and uh but he also ate a lot of health food if maybe you could address um the aspects again of because i was having a little trouble hearing this of uh what can help regenerate those pancreatic cells and what can adversely affect them uh as far as benefits of coffee and you know keeping that in balance so dextrose and pancreas that's kind of the basic questions and thanks again for all that every one of you do thank you thank you for your call thank you for your call what do you think of dextrose dr um well glucose uh it's um just the other word for glucose and uh stark turns into that and it isn't it's great stuff in itself when it's uh in the right balance with other things including a little bit of fructose always and saturated fat [48:07] and minerals and vitamins uh the dextrose or glucose itself is a factor in helping the pancreas to regenerate it's the polyunsaturated fats which misdirect the metabolism of glucose and fructose and uh the polyunsaturated fats that are creating the epidemic of diabetes and obesity and later all of the degenerative diseases uh cancer and Alzheimer's and so on this is your engineer i have a question do they call it dextrose when it's being used industrially instead of a food or how do they call it dextrose instead of glucose um it just has to do with the uh optical rotation of it it's just a different chemical history of of the way they they name the molecules they uh fructose was called levulose uh because it turns the [49:13] light to the left okay so basically dextrose just gets broken down into glucose it is glucose okay oh there's another quarter on the air so let's take this next quarter hello is it me you're on the air yeah hi yeah i would like to ask the doctor um okay i've stopped eating meat beef basically i ate a little bit of lamb and i ate a little pork and i ate a lot of fish um i stopped drinking coffee i stopped using mostly butter and i stopped using milk all together and i'm curious about what is because i have this like lower back condition but i don't i don't have the arthritis anymore that i had from all from from basically from beef when i i think was like um i call it uric acid um but i have like a lower back condition and uh [50:16] kind of a hip condition and i was curious if there was a you know and i take i take vitamin d3 um i take a a soluble b12 which is good but i'm i'm kind of curious about what you know what would be good you know because i don't i don't i don't use sugar at all i mean if i use anything i use a little bit of honey um but you know like that anyway i'm going to get off of the thing here and then wait a minute can you can you stay on the air because i think dr pete might have some questions for you okay uh but i can't hear oh right um can you can you turn them up a little bit okay dr pete can you um try to talk especially loud for this next caller here i'll see um honey has all of the virtues of ordinary sucrose and it has some special benefits [51:21] such as um antiseptic materials that the bees collect from the flowers but basically i also understand that they they uh there was some old chinese princesses that were preserved in honey that are still like okay and honey's still edible you know um ordinary white sugar has many of those same properties of they've done major surgery like chest surgery where they didn't have antibiotics and they just filled the hole with white crystalline sugar and the person recovered and had uh fewer scars than would have happened if they had used antibiotics really that's fascinating honey that's absolutely that's that's fascinating yeah i've got some of the references in my uh diabetes and sugar news did you hear did you hear my questions um yeah i think of the [52:23] you probably had a slight weakness of thyroid function meat eaters often get if they eat too much meat in relation to their thyroid function they all often get symptoms including arthritis uh and the low back symptoms are very common in a thyroid problem so you want to check your temperature and pulse rate and maybe have your your thyroid function checked but uh sometimes just a daily raw carrot will help the uh make up for the thyroid deficiency by reducing the bacterial toxins that poison your liver and interfere with thyroid function okay and what about kidney same thing the endotoxin absorbed from a poorly digested [53:25] plant material uh is the main thing that uh the endotoxin interferes with glucose or or sugar oxidation and prevents the activation of the thyroid hormone and then that leads to all of the inflammatory things and especially cartilage the disks between vertebrae uh tend to swell or become soft uh when you're uh thyroid deficient and uh having endotoxin okay what but what i was saying was like i stopped taking any any basic dairy i do do a little butter and a little bit of yogurt but i don't do any milk i don't do any beef what about eggs i don't do any um pardon me eggs eggs no i eat eggs maybe twice a week um you want to try to get at least 80 grams of good protein every day [54:31] oh yeah no no i understand the protein i eat lamb i eat a lot of you know a lot of fish and stuff but i mean i stopped doing milk coffee sugar you know white sugar and and beef basically what about fruit like orange juice um i'm not too into orange juice i mean i can i can use it but it tends to make me uh rather flemy in my throat well dates and grapes raisins i love all that stuff uh yeah then i eat him a lot calcium would be the main thing to concentrate on if you're eating enough uh fish and and lamb uh and eggs okay you should maybe um try powdering egg shells okay you know what i'm i'm sorry to have to break yeah okay i'm gonna get up there get somebody else on no no we've only got two minutes left so we need to [55:32] wrap up we need to thank dr p for his generous time and his wisdom thank you dr p so much for joining us okay um okay so people that have heard uh this evening show with dr p uh please go check his website it's www.rayrypeat.com there's lots of scientific referenced articles uh to back up everything that you've heard this evening and much much more um so his website it's always a good source of impartial uh information and uh some of it obviously whilst counter culture it's just open your eyes folks it's out there just for the looking and for those of you have ears to hear so until the third friday of november we've still got a a minute and a half there's only we're gonna cut cut off too short but until the third friday of next month november november 18 november the 18th that'll be the clocks will be going back and it'll be dark when we come in uh so for those [56:34] people okay our phone number let's just help people our phone up shall we okay uh our numbers sir how about you what's that there you go um if you want to if you live in the area it's 707 986 9506 or if you live outside of the area we have a toll free number that's 1-888 uh wbm herb which is 926-4372 and thank you very much for listening we really appreciate all of our callers calling in and all the support thank you thank you for your time
