---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Fukujima II, Serotonin, Melatonin
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rp4ZLLfBSxA
  # also https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-110415-fukujima-and-serotonin.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rp4ZLLfBSxA
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-26"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-26"
---
 [0:00] My name's Sarah. This is Andrew. We always do this. I'm so sorry I got thrown a little bit there when he wasn't joining us. I kind of skip the intro dr. Pete So if you would please just describe your academic professional background for those who perhaps have never listened to you. Okay, I'm after I had studied and taught Literature and linguistics. I decided that to understand consciousness and language, I should study the brain. But when I started graduate school in specializing in nerve biology, I discovered that the brain scientists were just as dogmatic as the linguistic theorists. So I went into general physiology, specializing in reproductive endocrinology. And that was one aspect of that got me interested in the biological effects of radiation, although I had been [1:05] interested in the fallout from the nuclear tests for many years as a big problem. So when I saw that the biology of estrogen was very similar to the biology of radiation damage, I tried to understand just what was going on in a cell that caused identical biochemical events to occur either from a dose of x-rays or a dose of estrogen. Okay. All right, what to I guess to continue on and wrap up last week, last month's presentation on the Fukushima dilemma of what was happening there. Unfortunately, the power plant is still smoldering and it doesn't look like there's going to be any real hope of having it calmed down sufficiently at least until September. I heard as a [2:08] realistic date. The cores themselves are not either approachable or too hot to deal with at this point in time, and it looks like they're going to continue smoking away. And then the initial stages of the development of this catastrophe, the several websites were revealing information. I think one of the first ones we came across was an Austrian website, and it was ZAMG.AU, I think it was .AU something. I can give that address out a little bit later on. And there's also a website RadNet, which is the EPA RadNet Air Concentration Measurement Data. They were giving out measurements right in the early days, and we could see looking at the model of the plume fallout from Fukushima that it was spreading across the Pacific and was eventually going to touch land on the west coast and or affect northern and southern latitudes. [3:11] Sarah, I think we want to go cover some of what's gone on with those results to date, and just cover some more of that. Well, I've only found one PDF file on the EPA's website that lists reported uranium in Anaheim, Uranium 234 and Anaheim Riverside on March 15th, and then also in Seattle and San Francisco on March 18th. And I haven't seen an updated file of recent records of uranium on that same PDF. It did list plutonium. It had a column for plutonium, but it didn't list that it had detected any. All right, the sims have shut down. Well, I'm not sure if that's just because they haven't detected any or they haven't reported what they have detected. It seems that there's iodine being detected in the rain water and the air all over the country. And I don't know if that's [4:12] we can presume that's from Japan or whether that's was being detected there before the accident and we only see the after the accident. Dr. P, I wonder, I had a look on there's an interesting website which is called the modern survival blog, which covers many different topics relating to preparedness, etc. And when this incident happened, the person who runs modern survival blog got straight on it and was posting a day by day scenario of what was happening. There was a retired nuclear scientist, I think that was his title, nuclear scientist called Arnie Gunderson, who I think he's been on several radio and television interviews with various people detailing what's happening. And if I'm from a very outset of the incident, he was saying that rather than being a level five accident, it was already a seven about a month ago. And in fact, they raised it from a five to a seven now. [5:13] So, in terms of what's what's potentially happening here, what do you think is some of the best advice people could take? I think the the basic thing is to eat old food canned or dried food and avoid fresh vegetables as far as you can do that. And to, for example, cheese, aged cheese is going to be completely safe for a long time. And avoiding the iodine damage to the thyroid gland, you can pretty well protect your self by saturating yourself with iodine from kelp and eating canned oysters and other healthish and maybe even taking if you paint tincture of iodine on your skin, you absorb quite a bit of it. [6:13] So you can saturate yourself with iodine to protect the gland thyroid gland during the time that iodine is still active, which it stays harmful for roughly six weeks after its creation. So if they're still making new radioactive iodine and emitting it, there's no telling how long that might continue to be a problem. What's your um, what's your impression of potassium iodide as a supplement? Well, it has its own long range potentially harmful effects. Even one milligram a day in a chronic diet is known to be associated with thyroid diet as hypothyroidism and probably increased rate of thyroid cancer. So you don't want to take any thyroid supplement [7:17] beyond a normal dietary sufficiency except in the presence of of serious radioactive iodine exposure. But considering the the risk from the radioactive iodine, I think a few milligrams of potassium iodide per day is a reasonable balance. Okay, but you would probably I think in a lot of ways with most things you would rather see these things come from nutrition. Um, yeah, yeah, it's a safer balanced amount. Even iodized salt is now seen to correlate with increased thyroiditis. Okay, so just what they're putting it they're putting iodine in our salt to try to protect us from thyroid problems. And in fact it's now been associated with causing thyroid problems. [8:17] Yeah. So a half a teaspoon of kelp powder a couple times a week or a couple milligrams of potassium iodide if you're in an area that has iodine coming or even if you're not with an in an area with radioactive iodine. The fact that that low that low dose shouldn't be too harmful for several weeks. For most people not a few people have some strange hypersensitivity to iodine. So you want to test the first dose at a very small amount because some people get an asthma attack or other very violent symptoms from even a small dose of iodine. Okay, and then the other site I wanted to mention was the beta count on the RadNet data the EPA's website. It's showing that there's been up to 50 counts per minute. Well 50 per second is where I would [9:19] be seriously concerned about 50 per minute wouldn't be bad. So and that was showing like in Eureka, California they have a beta count monitor and it's showing it was up to 50 counts per minute before the Japanese catastrophe and it continues sometimes reaching up to that level. So locally if this information is correct, which it there's another website that's called radiation network and it's a private or it's not private. It's a bunch of individuals with their Geiger counters and they have hooked up to a database that's on real time. So every minute this website updates with the counts the beta counts per minute. And so that's another place people might want to go if they're interested to look at real time around the country and it's called radiationnetwork.com. The government website is theepa.gov and you click on Japanese nuclear emergency. [10:24] Okay, and then lastly the other one that I mentioned at the beginning was modernsurvivalblog.com and the nuclear scientific engineer Arnie Gunderson. He's got a couple of posts on the site and is basically giving a day by day breakdown of what's been happening. Okay, I think as time goes on these things will become more apparent but unfortunately I think what he was what Arnie Gunderson was bringing out was the striking similarities in the cover-up of information between Chernobyl Three Mile Island and this incident and that it's unfortunate but the pathways of which the information comes is restricted in many ways at many times. The same thing holds true and that'll be the focus of the rest of the show but a lot of pharmaceutical drugs unfortunately pharmaceutical drugs and drugs in general are manufactured for profit with supposed pathologies to treat and [11:29] not always does the truth emerge until much later perhaps when they're withdrawn. Unfortunately the motive behind their production is not always not always too white. So I just wanted to let people know that you're listening to ask your herb doctor on KND Galapal 91.1 FM and from now really until the end of the show at eight o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related to the nuclear incident and what can be done or surrounding the rest of this topic of this month's show which is going to be serotonin serotonin uptake inhibitors and melatonin. Both of these are I think widely known by people where people have heard of the SSRIs and they've heard of some of the controversies surrounding them, but it seems that people generally believe that serotonin is a good happy drug. If you look for it or you search for it on the web everyone talking about it says it's a feel good, feel good [12:31] hormone and Dr. Pete what do you what do you have to say about serotonin in terms of your knowledge and information on it? The body has many responses to injury and serotonin and estrogen are two of the most basic primitive responses to any kind of generalized injury and for example, if you get sunburned in the next few hours you can measure a large amount of serotonin in the urine and that the same thing happens for any kind of injury including ionizing radiation and dental x-rays are enough to activate the production of of serotonin and it's just it's one of the basic defense mechanisms what it does is [13:33] activate simple things like shifting away from oxidative metabolism to glycolytic or even a kind of hibernating shutdown of systems at an extreme overproduction of serotonin you tend to go into a hibernating state animals according to the diet and and weather stress and so on before they go into hibernation for the winter will be producing more and more serotonin and that's it's a basic purpose is to keep the the machinery running while shutting down the expensive biological processes Actually dr. Pete could I could I hold ask you to hold that thought for a second? [14:34] Okay, um, there is actually a caller on the line. So I just wanted to make sure the person's gets on You're on the end Hi. Hi. Hi. Yeah, I had a couple questions One, does anybody know how long it takes for the ocean currents from japan to come over to the west coast? I was looking at an old atlas And there the current goes north up japan And south down the west coast And one of my fishman friends says that it's actually seasonal. They don't does that in the summertime And something different in the winter or something And the other question I had is Is anybody monitoring the the ocean? Uh contamination from the plan and of course everything that's not coming over to us is ending up, you know Most of it's probably going into the ocean. So And I just wanted to maybe we know maybe some callers would know. Okay on that. Anyway, thank you very much Okay, um, yeah, I think we'll leave that open to other callers as I don't have that information in front of me [15:39] And it would only be a be a rough guess. So I think some of the So something like 80 to 100 miles a day, maybe all right. Okay. There you go. It's uh, 4,000 miles, is it? Okay, all right, well, it's more more than that. I think it's 6,000 isn't it? Somewhere around there. Okay, maybe even eight takes 12 hours flying or 11. All right, so that's Okay, well, let's let's carry on. I will leave that thought open then for any other callers Perhaps we've got that specific information to hand and then um, talk to p if you'd if you'd carry on you were talking about Hibernation hibernation and protective mechanism for expensive cellular machinery Yeah, in the 1950s and 60s when the soviets were Worried about getting hydrogen bombed They were doing a lot of research on ways to defend against [16:42] Very intense radiation doses and serotonin was one of the things that they were studying and looking for safe analogs to use defensively because A big dose of radiation puts the organism in a state where it can tolerate with maybe Reducing mortality for a given dose by maybe 50 percent in some cases for a dose of maybe a thousand RADS and the unfortunately at for The kind of dose that we're more likely to be exposed to Serotonin is really what's causing the bulk of the damage For example, if you give cells in a culture dish [17:43] The amount of x-ray exposure that you get With a set of dental x-rays these cells will if you put them in a A photon detector they'll be emitting photons light produced by That the cellular damage and excitation were over an hour after the exposure and if you put unexposed cells in the water that those cells are in the Even without being exposed to radiation just to the emissions such as serotonin the end of the water The second batch of cells will begin mutating hours later and people have have cultured these [18:43] unexposed cells exposed only to the Chemical products produced by the injured cells And for 30 generation mutations keep occurring and To form a human being you only need about 30 multiplications of the original fertilized ovum So it's a That one small exposure has tremendous repercussions and for example A man with a x-ray treatment to a brain tumor for example is much more likely to have Children with major malformations The entry is circulated through the body even affecting the the health of the sperms and the [19:44] Probably animal studies suggest that these genetic instabilities Can go on for many generations of of a whole Cycling organisms passing on their unstable genes So do you think the amount of radiation we might be exposed to? However small it might be right or in this area in Humboldt County or even up to Oregon Or along the west coast is that you're saying that's not a lot of radiation, but it could be causing our cells to Express more serotonin and be exposed to more serotonin that then could have long-term negative effects. Um, you know probably one single atom Fissioning in your in your body it will cause that cell or a few cells to produce those Toxic communicating substances [20:47] and the rest of the body If the person is healthy the rest of the body will shut down those excited signals So it's a matter of balancing the vitality of the whole organism against the number of these Inferred cells. Okay. Good. Well, we're gonna talk about how we can balance that serotonin, but we do have a couple callers on the line Actually first a caller just wanted to interject that They had heard that it's going to take three years for the parts of houses that were washed out from the tsunami to start Washing up on our beaches here. So Three years three years according to one source and we have another caller coming right on now You're on the air Oh, sorry. That was me. I did say that it was on the bbc paying for millions of programs. It's uh, terrifyingly What was the name of that program? I didn't quite hear that [21:51] Was that the name terrifyingly wonderful? I'm not sure it was on the bbc. Whatever it was. Uh, I didn't hear the name Okay, so that was the caller That was the caller who said it would take three if she heard on the bbc. It would take three years That was a separate caller Okay, well, let's get back to what we were what we were doing here a minute ago with uh, okay So dr. P So if our cells are being exposed to a minute amount of radiation Or more if they're not telling us every the whole full picture the full story then And our cells are starting to express more serotonin and our the vitality of our organism is trying to Um quell that cascade of information. What can we do to keep our cells in a vital state? um, if you think of the old studies of the radiation causing dna breaks they found About 40 years ago that high thyroid function and the magnesium [22:54] Taken up into the cells under the influence of thyroid Was the best way to accelerate the repair process so that you didn't have the lingering mutations from breaking the chromosomes and the dna But that's uh, that was the repair activation for early high doses but there processes that apply to Even the the lowest exposure For example a study in seattle two or three years ago found that a full set of dental x-rays To a woman who was pregnant But wearing a lead apron and so on The exposure to her face would cause systemic influences that would cause the babies to be under underweight and underdeveloped [23:57] just as if she had taken An estrogenic substance that was stressing the system and Animal studies found that those estrogenic effects Coming from the exposure of any part of the body to ionizing radiation could be antagonized just like normal estrogen is by a a good dose of chrygesterone or even testosterone and the usual nutritional Things that help the body Constantly controlled the estrogen that is being exposed to so Just average everyday stress Has a great overlap with radiation the entry and estrogen and serotonin happen to be the The things that we have the best handle on for [25:00] protecting ourselves from from the long range effects Okay, well, how about the Gosh all the serotonin selective selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors that are Have come out some of which have been discontinued some of which have been modified What's what's your opinion on on these this class of drugs in terms of their negative effects knowing what they do energetically within the body Well to the extent that they really are acting Largely on serotonin I think it's good to look for all Pernodes But much of that is just advertising Invented things for going with the tv commercials the The idea that they're a happy pill for [26:02] raising your happy hormone and That sort of thing but actually they're acting on many different processes increasing serotonin and dopamine and Activating enzymes and inactivating other enzymes all through the body So no one really knows the full extent of what they're doing and and some of what they're doing is Beneficial some of it isn't So it goes pill by pill there are a few Very effective antidepressants that are the opposite. There are the serotonin uptake promoters Just exactly the opposite But they even work better And so which which ones are what are the drug names for those serotonin re uptake promoters? The best studied is uh tia neptine [27:03] The brand name is stable on and some people get it over the internet, but it isn't legal in the u.s But it's basically it promotes you're saying it uh, it uh Promotes the uptake of serotonin. So it's less active and then it has turns out to have lots of beneficial effects on bodily health her arthritis and and diabetes and lots of inflammatory things that relate to over exposure to Serotonin so with people that have diabetes and arthritis Maybe for them to take uh Something that would block their serotonin like you're this a stable on as I was saying Then that would help their symptoms and arthritis and um Yeah, I've talked to um quite a few people who were taking it as an antidepressant who Had very dramatic physical improvements at the same time [28:06] And if the physical conditions are all things that are known to be associated with high serotonin and uh, there's a whole class of of anti serotonin drugs that are becoming popular for More uses for example Some of their uses are to prevent nausea or diarrhea from radiation exposure. What they're doing is protecting you from the Serotonin which is a byproduct of the radiation exposure and you can even Prevent sunburn with an anti serotonin drug. So do you I wonder if the Japanese um medical system is Giving the people that have been exposed to high levels of radiation. I wonder if they're giving them these anti serotonin drugs I suspect that they're Just as hypnotized by the pharmaceutical industry as Americans are So what kind of um, what are some of the names of these anti serotonin drugs that are used for nausea and [29:11] diarrhea and radiation exposure on dan citron is the most popular Anti-nausea anti serotonin drug, but I think one of the best is called lysuride l-i-s-u-r-i-d-e And all of these are Based on the same Indole molecular structure that Serotonin is but they Are tuned in a different way by additives for example adding bromine Bromocryptine is one that's used to treat pituitary tumors because prolactin is promoted by stress or by serotonin or by radiation and by modifying the Indole molecule from the urgot fungus [30:13] is that's the basic Molecule that is used for these anti serotonin drugs by modifying it slightly it blocks the effect of serotonin and shrinks the pituitary tumor by preventing the stimulating effects of of the serotonin Okay, you're listening to ask your a doctor on kmed gabapho 91.1 fam and from 730 and that's gone It's 735 until the end of the show here at eight o'clock You're invited to call in any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of serotonin melatonin and misconceptions In medical drugs and we have with a special guest speaker dr. Raymond p Who's able to answer any questions that you may have about that subject and or the ongoing Fukushima accident and what can be done safely to help yourself avoid any unnecessary harm [31:14] Okay, so serotonin we've It's so strange has come come full circle that serotonin supposed to be the happy pill and yet slowly but surely through one mistake or another They're now bringing around anti serotonin drugs Well, our tax dollars are paying for research in medical universities Why I think I don't know exactly if it's tax dollars or not But all these professors and our people doing their phds are doing this research on these things and yet The general public when they go to see their doctor and they ask for this drug or that drug Well, that's not what they get prescribed doesn't matter what the research shows. It has to go through how many Oh, it's just very frustrating Well, how about melatonin dr. Pete? Oh, well the body has enzymes That are activated by stress for example in the pineal gland Adrenaline is the signal adrenaline rises in the darkness because [32:15] ordinary light is Preventing some of the free radical activity that rises In the darkness that activates Adrenaline and the adrenaline is the immediate activator of the enzyme which converts serotonin into melatonin But the same enzyme system Can be found in an inflamed breast or a rheumatic knee joint for example and In these situations of inflammation melatonin is some people have believed that melatonin was at fault for causing rheumatoid arthritis, but actually it seems to be Performing the same function that it does in the brain a way of Eliminating serotonin, which is the actual pro inflammatory substance and [33:18] since Serotonin stimulates cell division and inflammation The presence of this enzyme in the in the breast is being considered One of the approaches for preventing or treating breast cancer To accelerate the removal of serotonin and into the breakdown of serotonin into melatonin. Yeah We have a caller on the line Hey, coolie. You're on there Hi, yeah, um a couple of questions and you've gotten actually to where my question was going to go how serotonin relates to melatonin I'm understanding that serotonin is converted by adrenaline into melatonin And is that part of as a body has maybe done a lot of work That sort of downshift them into a sleep mode because I understand and it's available as a supplement melatonin is to help people relax and Get to a sleep state sooner [34:20] Yeah, probably melatonin has a fairly direct Anti serotonin effect. It hasn't been studied very much. But besides you're eliminating the serotonin by combining it chemically Turning it into melatonin I suspect that the melatonin is actually a defense as an antagonist to some extent Against the serotonin And when you say antagonist that I want to make sure I understand the term that means basically that it counters or converts whatever that Material that it's an antagonist to into something else or neutralizes its effect neutralizes the effect. I I think it the the presence of the enzyme that changes serotonin to melatonin it's present in inflamed situations and I think that's a way of [35:24] Getting down the level of serotonin. But I think the presence of melatonin itself blocks some of the effects that this free radical production activated by serotonin So melatonin in and of itself would be an anti serotonin in effect. I would I would understand. Yeah, I don't know how how great that effect is but I think there's Evidence that it has some of that effect Now you mentioned something a little bit ago that piqued my curiosity. We've got this huge problem with diabetes and I think that a lot of it is related to high fructose corn syrup If I can say that obscenity on the air and the uh Other thing that since you brought this up. I'm curious as to whether the huge influx of SSRIs such as Prozac, etc may also have contributed to the rise in diabetes and obesity amongst very young Kids that seem to be the lab rats for the pharmaceutical industry when it comes to giving them these new allegedly wonderful [36:31] anti-depressants A study at UCLA that came out last summer Analyzed the corn syrup sweetener that's used in soft drinks and they Chemically tested it and found that it contained just the amount of fructose and glucose That it was claimed to have but then they hydrolyzed it and found that it contained polysaccharide starch like material containing four to five times the amount of calories that the Original sugar had so it's basically a syrup or a starch like material With four or five times as many calories as you think you're getting from the sugars And then if somebody were taking a lot of those types of uh food and was given an anti-depressant that was uh [37:34] serotonin reuptake inhibitor that might even further compound the problem well the um these polysaccharides that aren't easily digested by our human enzymes Are likely to feed bacteria lower in the intestine that produce fermentation products including lactic acid which are responsible for causing the intestine to increase its Already great production of serotonin and to cause it to be absorbed into the circulation in quantities enough to affect behavior uh anxiety for example is increased in animals in proportion to the fermentation of these starch like molecules so I suspect that the starchy materials in the corn sweetener are [38:35] Pretty directly increasing exposure to serotonin Well, I wonder if anyone has done a study on someone taking prozac or related ssri who's also obese Would you know expose the Real cause of this whole thing spinning out of control and causing all this obesity It's really an interesting point that you brought up and it made me think along those lines and before I go I did want to mention the previous collars There are some websites that should have the information as to how long those Radionuclides and weather in general come across the Pacific from Japan and the whole asian continent Over here to the pacific coast and that would be the NOAA website the usgs website Helen called the guy I'm sorry Helen called the cot and physicians for social responsibility will have all kinds of information on radiation And radionuclides in its after effects and probably will have some links to other Websites that might have good information on that and there should be a uc berkeley site that has specific [39:41] transmission across the Pacific I saw on a newscast Specifically what that caller was asking about and it was just a few days because of the jet stream So to get something to the jet stream That's why we here in the Cape Mendocino area is both in humbles and Mendocino county We were the first landfall that detected radionuclides the few days after that occurred Thank you very much for the program and I've always enjoyed listening for the information that you bring to the air Thank you for your call. Thank you for calling. We do have one or two more queries on the line So let's take the next caller. Actually your engineer has a question about inflammation I keep honey bees and get stung a lot and I've heard it's good to stop inflammation yet I get inflamed when I get stung So what's going on? Probably developing some kind of hypersensitivity to it. Did you did you get the same inflammation? Oh, no, no, I always I get no, I mean at the site of the sting it's inflamed But I hear it's good for you an anti-inflammatory in the long run So I was wondering if you knew anything about that and it seems to be good [40:43] Okay, yeah, I I I heard a little bit about the treatment of arthritis is With bee stings. I know that I've heard about the nettles thrashing the Romans thrashing themselves with nettles to relieve joint pains and that Seems a little bit. I don't know in terms of the histamine. Dr. P. What would you think about the histamine reaction? from from that I've heard that It's the high cortisol production from the pain as well as the histamine and serotonin from the the venom itself serotonin has some very direct actions on the cortisol producing system and I think it's maybe analogous to The way surgery can cure things the In animal research [41:44] They have to do a control false On one group of animals because it's so common for the trauma Of just being cut to cure whatever it was. They were thinking that a surgery was curing and a very painful Beasting will activate your adrenals to the point that it can relieve The swollen knee for example from the cortisol Counter Irritation that doctors used to practice. Okay. We do actually have two more callers on the line. So let's take the next caller You're The pharmaceutical industry makes a claim that these SSRIs increase the receptors for serotonin Accounting for long-term effects even after the drugs are stopped. I wonder if you could comment about that [42:51] If you lock A transmitter the body adaptively increases the so-called receptors so Increasing the exposure to something Usually decreases the receptors for that substance In an adaptive process of everything ends up more or less the way it started and The whole idea of receptor. I think is just another ploy of the industry to make things simple for television advertising and for medical school The When you look carefully at at the the long-range arguments Behind the whole receptor idea people for 60 years or more have been pointing out that [43:53] The state of the organism and of the cell Absolutely determines How a given substance is going to affect the cell exciting it or inhibiting it for example and It isn't necessarily that you make more of the So-called receptor protein, but that the whole state of the cell the energy Charge for example of the cell governs what Activation of that receptor protein is going to do to the whole cell so I think the The only way to think of a receptor is that the organism is the receptor or the cell is the receptor because the state of the of the brain affects the way the The gonad or the adrenal for example is going to Respond to a given chemical because [44:56] everything is constantly being subjected to nervous chemical and energy inputs Collar is your phone on Oh, sorry about that. Yeah, sorry. We're having a really hard time here. Collars always turn your phone off, please Okay, next question No, I didn't mean you to hang out. Okay. Well, we do have another caller. Yeah, let's take the next caller Collars always turn their radios off before you talk on the phone, right? So I said phone home. Whoops. I think the next caller should be there. Are you there caller? Yeah, I'm here. Um, I Uh, I can't hear you too well, but uh, let me get my quick now. You this show is just fascinating I I must say and then the expertise is well, well appreciated. Uh, that you're sharing it with us on there I want to find out because uh, I uh, I'm currently taking lexapro and uh, and also [46:01] Sometimes I get migraines and I take um, imitrex and uh And uh, I know that imitrex is uh, well it sure works well on the on those migraines And uh, and you know, uh, and I got a thyroid condition So I'm hyperthyroid Synthroid and I just kind of wondered if there's uh, if the serotonin uptake inhibitors are any kind of a problem for uh for uh, you know the thyroid situation Yeah, they're very closely connected uh for a long time it's been Clear that hypothyroid people often have extremely high serotonin levels And so the active part of the thyroid hormone t3 Synthroid is just t4 which requires the liver to activate it [47:02] The active thyroid hormone Increasing will decrease the of and retention of serotonin and serotonin being in inflammation promoting and affecting constriction and leakiness of blood vessels is a major factor in migraines which are mostly associated with hypothyroidism Well, you know, I would also take a cytomel. Yeah, cytomel is a good anti-cerotonin thing and with the right amount of it It's pretty effective against migraines That was one of my first interests in endocrinology was my own migraines I found that [48:04] It was largely an interaction between intestinal inflammation Which 95 percent of our serotonin is made in the intestine and any kind of irritation in the intestine increases our exposure to serotonin, but especially if your thyroid function is low Causing inefficient sugar metabolism hypothyroidism plus a sensitive intestine will cause periodic flooding of the system with serotonin which Can be measured in migraine attacks during an attack or just before an attack the serotonin Rises tremendously So it is I can't hear everything you're saying, but it is the upshot is is it Is there a problem to to combine? You know the lexpro and the imitrex and [49:06] Synthroid and the cytomel and all that crap they got me on There is a blood test for serotonin that I think more people should be checking on It's much more meaningful than the urine tests and so on and the The long-range effects of excess serotonin exposure Are very similar to the long-range effects of of chronic radiation or chronic estrogen exposure They acutely can produce Uh inflammation, but if you keep up the exposure in the long run you increase your tendency to have fibrosis of various tissues Okay, uh, one one one last question up for the host there [50:09] You guys the ones that own the western botanical medicine company Yeah Well, I've tried and I initially had real good luck on your uh with your headache relief medicine or whatever you call the tincture and But I thought I'd bought it again recently and I hadn't bought it for a while But look did you change the dosage amount for migraine because I I thought I used to use more of it one for migraine and uh seems now like the migraine and the And the other kind of headaches that can seem kind of dosage. Was there some change? Yes. There was a label change Okay, but and it was also a dosage recommendation change on that right what I I just recommended the same type of dose whether you were You can still take up to the 20 milliliters per day But I changed the dosage because if you were having a stress or tension headache I'm not allowed to put that on the label and I can't put migraine on the label either So I have to just put for occasional headaches [51:10] I see okay. Yeah, because that helps explain it because I I when I took the the lower dosage that you talk about now It didn't seem to have the same effect as the dose that I had previously been recommended to So I guess I'll just try to go back to that. Okay. I think that's a good product. Appreciate it. Thank you Thank you. If you're cool. Bye. Well, there's one more quarter on the line We better not take it because because I still have to give some recommendations for nutritional advice before we get off the air tonight. So hello three and a half minutes Hello, you're on the air They are taking me. Okay. Yeah. Hello Yes, my name is Louise and I live on fly rock mountain and I have a thyroid condition And I take uh level rocks and prescribed by my doctor every month But I also I'm 60 years old and I also take a turn off for high blood pressure And I've recently been having some migraine headaches in and I was wondering does my thyroid have something to do with that [52:12] Well, there's lots of different things that could cause migraine headaches But uh, it would be good if you came for a consultation and we could look at your nutritional status That's always a good place to start and if you okay Are you going to be in X-ray blood or midway or? Well, I'll give you my number. Um at the end of the show if you'll just listen in a couple more minutes I'm going to give our phone number and doctor Pete's website and you can contact him and you can also contact us And we'd be more than happy to discuss nutritional advice with you Okay, because I am overweight and I'm very very Saddened and concerned about this. I've never been overweight before my whole life And I've never in my thyroid condition. I had ribad migraines also I mean It's the couple of the the couple way both of those things Well, we'd be happy to um talk with you and we'll give you that information in a little bit. I'm sorry. We have to In the call callers and I wanted to briefly mention before the end of the show [53:15] That doctor Pete's talked about starches As in the form of the corn syrup irritating the intestine and increasing serotonin So one way we can protect ourselves from this radiation and the increase serotonin effects of inflammation is to replace our starches, which are grains and beans and starchy vegetables like cooked potatoes and carrots and beets replace those with soft ripe juicy fruits And also by keeping our thyroid function high with lots of coconut oil Up to three tablespoons a day plenty of foods with calcium Local dairy if it's still okay around here It seems to be that Eureka level hasn't changed And also plenty of um good fruit sugars And dr. Pete did you have any final comments? No, I think that covers it Okay, well for those that are listening dr. Raymond Pete endocrinologist and research biochemist his website is www.raypeatrypeat.com [54:18] And uh, my name's Andrew. My name's Sarah and our phone number is 888 926-4372, which is WBM for Western Botanical Medicine Herb, H-E-R-B Thank you to all of you who listen regularly and those who tuned in this evening to those who have ears let them hear