---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Inflammation I
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-110121-inflammation-1.mp3
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-26"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-26"
---
 [0:00] This free program is paid for by the listeners of Redwood Community Radio. If you're not already a member, please think of joining us. Thank you. This free program is paid for by the listeners of Redwood Community Radio. If you're not already a member, please think of joining us. Thank you. This free program is paid for by the listeners of Redwood Community Radio. If you're not already a member, please think of joining us. Thank you. Welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. [1:20] My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. My name is Sarah. We get a lot of very positive feedback concerning Dr. Ray Pete who's joined us on many of our [2:26] shows now and again he's joining us tonight and we'll discuss the role of inflammation in the disease process and reiterate some root causes and ways to avoid generating inflammation generally. Okay so good evening Dr. Pete and thank you so much for joining us again, happy new year. Hi Dr. Pete, sorry to interrupt you Andrew, but we'd like to ask you a question. We need to say, basically there's a disclaimer, the views and opinions expressed throughout this broadcast are views and opinions and they do not reflect the stations thoughts and ideas. Not necessarily, they might agree they might not. Time will be made for other viewpoints. Thank you for joining us. Very good, okay so 2011 kicks off with a good old disclaimer. So to get back to Dr. Pete, thanks so much for joining us. As always for folks who've not listened to our show before, let alone perhaps heard you [3:28] on the shows, would you perhaps just go over your academic and professional career? I was a student and teacher in the humanities for about 10 or 15 years before I studied in graduate school on biology, basically nerve biology and reproductive biology and I've taught a few courses in biochemistry and immunology and other things. Okay, I know you've extensively written papers, fully referenced papers on many different topics and I know that a lot of the programs that you've joined us on have really been a broad range of separate subjects but interrelated in many different ways and I know the topic [4:30] for tonight's discussion is the role of inflammation on the human body, what inflammation does, how is it generated, how can you do something about it. Perhaps people that are listening, would you just briefly discuss what you think we all understand when we hear the word inflammation and then we'll go over the broad view of inflammation in a newer thinking, it's actually the thinking is actually fairly old but it's been brought up by contemporary doctors. So what do you think people first understand when they hear inflammation, how do we understand it? A few years ago or so when I was in school they were teaching that inflammation is part of the curative healing process so we needed to kill germs and heal but in the last 10 [5:31] or 20 years the change has been seeing it occurring in all of the degenerative diseases, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, heart disease, arthritis and so on. So it's pretty abrupt in the 20th century that there was this sudden change to seeing inflammation as at least not all good, maybe all bad. Okay, do you know that from reading a little bit about Plato and Aristotelian views of medicine and I know from an inflammatory point of view they definitely had a different metaphor for understanding it. Given that the doctor, Ilya Mechnikov and later on, that's it, with the view of inflammation [6:45] that both Ilya Mechnikov and the later doctor have brought around, would you describe the difference between it and how fundamentally it makes such a big difference to the way we should understand what it is that causes it and how to help ourselves? Mechnikov had worked primarily as an embryologist understanding the organization of developing primitive organisms and more complex and when he saw the phagocyte process when he put a splinter in an organism and saw the cells gathering around it he interpreted that in the context of what he knew best which was how the organisms create and maintain their body structure and it was partly the fact that the Nobel Prize went simultaneously to [7:48] him with that very biological view of immunity and to Erlich who was working with chemical poisons and the idea of immunity as killing bad organisms took over throughout the United States and most of the world for most of the 20th century and that as Americans started studying the white blood cells and the thymus gland and things that we think of as part of the immune system they were influenced by the drug industry Erlich's looking for the bullets to kill the evil organisms that passed over to thinking about antibodies and cells [8:52] as aimed primarily at organisms that are trying to take over. It reminds me of how you've described the progression of hepatitis C being well we're told that it's this nasty bug but maybe it's just the body's trying to rearrange something and there's an inflammation and a process that's going on that is from damage. Yeah the retroviruses in general we've got lots of them and they seem to be as much part of us as anything and they don't do anything that for sure is is harmful and if you mess up an organ like poison the liver you get a bunch of these retroviruses which their point they call them [9:58] retro is that normally DNA makes RNA and RNA makes protein but there are enzymes which will turn RNA into DNA and that was first observed in 1979 but at that time Trochan and Lamarck were they had been totally weeded out in the late 1940s with the Cold War all of Lamarck's followers were fired from all of the teaching positions in the U.S. and so when in 1979 when the idea that information could go from RNA to DNA was demonstrated my professors unanimously said it's impossible that's Lamarck and I'm not permitted. [11:01] Just so that people listening understand the excuse me the DNA is a thing in ourselves that codes for the manufacture of proteins and many many things are necessary the RNA is the messenger the transcription factor for producing the DNAs if the retroviruses then can actually manufacture DNA that DNA then can get into our mitochondria and or affect a change in its own right because it's DNA and and some of the people inclined in the direction of Lamarck Barbara McClintock and Lee Senko they had proposed that you can get genetic change eventually Barbara McClintock got the Nobel Prize for it but about 40 years too late [12:02] demonstrating that they believe that information can flow from the environment into the DNA and some of these people were were actually saying that there should be enzymes such as are seen in retroviruses enzymes that can create new DNA in response to environmental experience. Oh well that reminds me about that test I think you said it was in Egypt Dr. Pate? Oh yeah there was in many countries there was a schistosomiasis epidemic it was pretty chronic and a very high percentage of Egyptians had it and they were treated for that with some chemicals that injured their liver and now they say that it was caused by spreading a [13:07] virus but other experiments suggest that just the chemical treatment that was aimed at killing this parasite could have been enough to cause the livers to express retroviruses one of which is now called hepatitis C. So it's looking at the disease as a as a damaged particle rather than an infectious organism? Yeah I think this is what Peter Dusberg is suggesting when he says that retroviruses of HIV for example isn't known to be cause of immunodeficiency that he suggests that it's the result of chemical poisoning. And I remember reading about five years ago an article from Dr. Stefan Lanker who is also [14:07] putting down the HIV hypothesis for or the viral hypothesis for HIV. Okay so back to inflammation in terms of the inflammatory process then and how we or I understood it from school and from university studying physiology how does the newer view or the older view explain in a newer way describe inflammation and how does it differ? Well if you look at the injury of the fetus it heals without inflammation and it doesn't produce a scar and basically it's perfect healing at a very early stage you can split the embryo and each part of the embryo will grow into a complete animal but later in development you can cut or otherwise injure a [15:14] part of the the fetus and it simply zips itself shut makes new cells and doesn't leave a scar or inflammation and it's after being born that inflammation as we know it occurs. We need to all crawl back into our mother's womb. Yeah and two there are two things that happen when we're born one is our carbon dioxide exposure goes way down and the oxygen availability increases greatly so a shift away from carbon dioxide which is anti-inflammatory and at the same time when we're no longer protected by the uterus and placenta which act as a filter and they let very little polyunsaturated fat in so practically all newborns are considered [16:20] deficient in the essential fatty acids so-called but these begin building up during childhood from practically any diet that we're exposed to and that combined with the reduced availability of carbon dioxide you can account for basically all of the features of inflammation and degeneration that are distinct from the prenatal healing process. We still have some of the features of prenatal healing but and they can be recovered to some extent. For example if you pack a wound with sugar it practically heals without a scar and that's partly because it's not exactly approaching [17:25] prenatal conditions but it's giving an extremely generous supply of sugar which can be used to make carbon dioxide. This is behind the Greeks using honey and deep wounds and the sugar makes it unnecessary for the cells to metabolize any of the fatty acids so that even if your organism has been eating lemon integrating them into the tissues presence of sugar it makes it possible to energize and repair cells without drawing down more of these unsaturated fats which produce all of the features that we know of as inflammation as distinct from healing. Just to summarize for some of our listeners in case you haven't heard of polyunsaturated fat these are liquid vegetable oils that are present in our [18:32] almost everybody's diet and you can't avoid them to some extent by avoiding any liquid vegetable oil apart from olive oil and eating coconut oil and butter in place. Okay for those listeners who've just joined you're listening to ask your herb doctor on KMUD Garbable 91.1 FM and from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of inflammation. The number here if you live in the area is 9233911 or if you live outside the area the toll-free number is 1800 KMUD Rad. Okay so those two things then the decrease in carbon dioxide and the increase in polyunsaturated fatty acids if people started to increase their carbon dioxide content I know we've mentioned in the past bag breathing as a very simple way to do that [19:35] and or living at elevation if that's possible higher elevation and cutting out polyunsaturated fatty acids what else what else could be done in a person to lessen their chance of the inflammation that might otherwise be generated. Another of the very basic things promoting inflammation rather than healing is the endotoxin that from bacteria that can be absorbed into the bloodstream and if your liver is well nourished and well energized it can cut out practically 100%!o(MISSING)f the endotoxin but if the intestine is is stressed in any way which can be nervous stress increasing the adrenaline that cuts down the blood supply [20:39] the reduced blood supply does things like reduce histamine and serotonin which make the intestine more permeable letting more of the endotoxin get into the bloodstream and the endotoxin does the same thing throughout the body it increases the permeability lowers the energy and increases the inefficiency that shows up as inflammation in its various things such as swelling and turning red local heating because of the high blood supply. Okay so basically stress is a big killer along with other things that promote inflammation I know for our listeners I've just been thinking about Dr. Pitzman talking about stress that [21:44] there's lots of herbs that can help to de-stress you I know thyroid is also something that can help your body work better and not run on so much adrenaline and stress hormones and a lot of people who get extremely stressed are often running on adrenaline to keep their metabolism up rather than running on an adequate amount of thyroid so um Dr. P, do you have anything else to add to how we can help minimize stress? Keeping the intestine as clean as possible moving stuff along raw carrots or bamboo fruits happen to be antiseptic vegetable material that doesn't feed the bacteria and tends to suppress the bacterial growth so that it doesn't come too far up the intestine and they also bind the endotoxin and other chemicals that that should be eliminated [22:48] if the the intestine is sluggish what the liver has excreted into the bile trying to get rid of will be reabsorbed farther down the intestine and come back to poison the liver and if you keep a stream of good clean material moving through you can lower the the toxins that should be excreted and that would include unwanted hormones including estrogen which the liver should be able to 100%!e(MISSING)liminate as they reach the liver and it will reduce the endotoxin and shift the serotonin and histamine such that it will also lower the cortisol production and that total pattern will increase the good hormones progesterone and testosterone for example [23:57] and for those who might like a nice recipe Dr. Pete suggested that if you add apple cider vinegar or lemon or lime juice to raw grated carrots with some salt and coconut oil or olive oil that it's even more antimicrobial antiviral antibacterial as well as antifungal with the apple cider vinegar Dr. Pete what do you think about using anti-inflammatories as another means to lower inflammation in addition to what we talked about briefly for foods and avoiding foods some of them are very helpful i mentioned that cleaning the intestine will lower the production of cortisol and raise the pregnenol and testosterone and progesterone these are our natural most powerful anti-inflammatory things to stabilize the fetus is exposed to [25:02] extremely high concentration of progesterone until it's born and so if keeping our production of progesterone as high as possible can make a big difference in susceptibility to inflammation and degeneration but aspirin and related things a lot of fruit chemicals are similar to aspirin uh and have a protective effect what what particular fruit chemicals um i'm specifically thinking of a neuroinjun and neuroinjun then in oranges okay is is that in grapefruit as well but how about well there's another one in grapefruit that happens to poison an enzyme system in the liver uh flooding estrogen accumulate tremendously right and this is such a well-known medical fact [26:06] that in fortuna maternity ward they say we no longer serve grapefruit juice to our pregnant mothers because it interferes with the hormones they didn't specify that it blocked the p450 enzyme that helps the liver excrete excessively high or all of the excess estrogen okay so neuroinjunin and then is there anything else that you think of uh no okay do you do you know have you uh have you heard or have they done in the past i can't can't imagine they haven't but um animal experiments modeling after uh keeping a co2 concentration high um keeping all the uh inflammatory products that would normally be associated with an animal's diet or their environment out and measuring different things to see how how they performed or how longer they lived or oh yeah um the um about 70 years ago people were noticing that uh food restriction could increase lifespan 30 or 40 [27:11] percent then it has gone through phases in which they they saw that this could happen in even adult animals could could live longer and healthier by uh reducing the food intake but then they started trying different specific foods and it happens that the foods which are eliminated are those which produce inflammation in various ways uh for example the polyunsaturated fats and the um amino acids that contribute to inflammation such as tryptophan and methionine just eliminating one of these will increase longevity about 30 or 40 percent in animal studies okay well that's a lot 30 to 40 percent so these um indians that live to 120 years of age [28:14] live in the Himalayas I mean the andy sorry excuse me are what are they just not eating any polyunsaturated oils and I mean do you know any anything at high altitudes uh all of these long life cultures uh in South America and uh the Caucasus and Nepal they all lived at fairly high altitudes and were surrounded by uh glaciers in in most of the cases so that there uh they were drinking water that was fairly recently high altitude snow which happens to be isotopically different from sea level water it's been refined by a repeated distillation as it rains out going to higher and higher altitudes it becomes uh metabolically stimulating light water where um average water contains some of the metabolic uh flowing heavy water [29:23] but at the same time the atmosphere at high altitudes is uh very low in oxygen and so people retain more carbon dioxide in their tissues that's another resemblance of the prenatal condition and generally they um are sheep farmers uh sheep can live at relatively high altitudes and so they uh tend to either eat uh vegetables fruits or um cheese lots of cheese and milk related dishes uh that's very interesting it's almost yeah i know the the uh the thing about the uh rainwater that's pretty interesting i know from a now chemical perspective the first prerequisite is to distill water seven times to be used in the experiments because [30:24] the alchemists always believe that each successive distillation raise the energy of the water and i've read an article about um they also use storm water water that was only collected during electrical storms but i did read an article about uh water because i many many years ago i never thought anything there was any difference between regular water tap water or whatever it was all water to me it was all h2o but it's actually very different and it's it's a lot of papers have been written on the subject of water and how how different energetically they are and how different they make you know what difference they make in the body and how available um the water is to the body and to the cell uh in the 1930s when they first made isotopically uh heavy water with deuterium replacing hydrogen they found that it slowed biological processes the daily rhythm nerve conduction and in 1950 they showed in mouse experiments that it tremendously accelerated the [31:29] aging process all of the features of aging slowing metabolism and and dying prematurely were produced but it took about 50 years after that before people started experimenting with the light water from which the heavy water had been removed and they found that for example they were experimenting with it in russian space vehicles and they found that the condensed sweat had been filtered and was a very light water resembling glacier water all right so what water do you recommend people drink dr beat do you have one and no you have to go to a beat near a glacier but you have to go okay so you have to go 15 000 feet this is why this is probably why they bottle water right yeah if it really is that but um it happens that the um some plants uh will [32:31] absorb the water at the high altitudes and uh concentrate even more sugar beats for example intrinsically uh eliminate deuterons and so they have white hydrogen incorporated into their tissues and if they grow in colorado at a high altitude where they're getting already refined water then the beat sugar contains the equivalent of glacier water wow cool i wonder i wonder what kind of altitude beat stops growing out though because i i don't i don't know that it's that cold it's not that cold hardy was it so yeah they're fairly cold hardy but i don't know the altitude one okay okay well you're listening to ask your a doctor uh from now until the end of the show you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of inflammation and our guest speaker is dr raymond peep okay so until until people start calling [33:34] the cell communication thing is quite interesting it quite interesting to me in terms of i think when people uh or when we were taught physiology we were taught about uh phagocytic activity engulfing cells and cell drinking activities and i understand that these these these descriptions are not that accurate um the language with which it's been described is pretty uh erroneous if you like to use a better word but what do you think about in in the in the context of what you understand cell communication uh cell to cell communication um it it um i think it it works uh on many different levels but i think the important one has been sketched out um by starting with people like albert sent georgie who demonstrated that uh cells um muscle systems and secretory systems and such [34:39] are uh tuned electronically to the uh the um properties of of the molecule that are um they they talk about them as as quantum chemical features but it's just the way the electrons resonate in the particular molecules and that's because the the whole cell is tuned to uh resonate to certain substances but there's a recent lecture by i think his name is luca turin a google lecture on uh pharmacology but it it is uh showing the uh current vitality of that idea of albert sent georgie which uh another person may one whole uh has a website talking about the uh coherence of [35:39] an organism and her website has a picture of a a worm made through a polarizing microscope showing that uh there is coherence on the atomic level uh all the way through the the uh little worm and i think that kind of coherence electronic or chemical and electrical interaction is at the basis of such things as cell recognition there there are the lock and key uh processes enzyme substrate and antibody uh antigen recognition but uh the uh important things for communicating between cells i think are a whole step beyond the lock and key okay before we get any further with that i know there's uh the couple of callers on the line at least there's one on the line for sure um caller you on the end hi hi good evening i have two questions one is if you you and sarah [36:46] could give a phone number to contact you and my other question is for dr pete um i've been doing the carrot thing and i'm really this is very interesting to me i'm just fascinated with it but i have an unrelated question and that is um i've been getting off of prozac that i took for many years and i'm having all of what they call discontinuation which i would call drug withdrawal but you know like agitation and sweating and um so on and i was wondering are there herbs that one can take to to help alleviate that discomfort what's going on yes yes there are herbs that you can take to help alleviate the discomfort of withdrawing from prozac i was doing it because partly because i want i'm i'm worried about the influence of the serotonin uptake inhibitors on my bone structure right i remember you called before right i'm well into [37:50] it and i'm surviving but i was well done dr pete do you have any recommendations um yeah the um the good effect of those serotonin uptake inhibitors uh i think it's really other things not at all serotonin i think it's in spite of the serotonin and if you look at the history of serotonin you see that in the 1950s it was discovered to be what what makes the carcinoid syndrome or the carcinoid tumor so bad and the the tumor itself instead of turning almost all of our dietary cryptophanes in vettniacin these tumors turn the bulk of it more than half of it into serotonin and so they they flood us they're worse than prozac and the features well defined [38:55] for this massive overdosing of serotonin are a good insight into what's going on with the drug industry as the um the people flushed became depressed anxious and aggressive under the influence of serotonin they developed arthritic pains a whole range of inflammatory degenerative symptoms the skin would eventually thicken heart valves would become fibrotic and uh these are things that are now being seen associated with the uptake inhibitors osteoporosis heart disease breast cancer obesity and here serotonin is the supposed good guy and it's just another mediator of inflammatory responses well i don't think it's accurate because getting off of it is really awful it must have been doing something else besides making me feel a little better [40:00] there are good ways to get off i i think pregnenolone thyroid and uh coffee are very helpful coffee you know you have to adjust to the coffee but it goes with thyroid sugar progesterone and so on as part of an anti-inflammatory system of the when we were talking about the anti-inflammatory substances i should have mentioned caffeine is one of them and also too with caffeine if if you're already running on a lot of adrenaline and you're you're very you get very low blood sugar if you drink caffeine that can um worsen the symptoms but is if you restock your liver's glycogen stores through eating uh low uh sugars that are lower glycemic index but more importantly non-starchy sugars then your body will not respond to the adrenaline like it would if [41:04] you were very low blood sugar so that's a process of adapting great and now could you give me a contact number for you and andrew yes uh are you within the 707 area i am yeah i'm in leightonville so i'm just i'm not that far away okay so it's um 986 uh huh 9506 and um extension two to ask questions extension three to set up a consultation oh okay and and you're in garberville right yes our clinic is located in garber okay i just couldn't find you in the phone book so i thought this month i'm going to get your phone thank you so much and thank you dr pete i'm reading things on your website it's so informative thank you thank you for your call thank you okay i think is there another cooler uh well someone had a question okay about arnica how it works and how to use it okay arnica is a um very anti-inflammatory flower and you really need to [42:05] have an oil made from arnica you'd want to make a macerated oil and this is how we make it and then we don't actually sell it to stores um for retail like we do or does it grow around here herbal tinctures no no it grows at high elevations i mean i imagine it grows well and also in montana it's arnica montana is the latin name but it doesn't grow around here i don't know if you could get it to grow around here because it is such a high elevation plant yeah the one doesn't amount the strict sense of the word montana is mountain well i thought it did grow in the us oh well you know maybe up in montana there's lots of mountains up there so it's definitely not i thought it did grow in the mountainous united states anyways we can um check on that and see if i'm right or wrong here on the montana but um you want to make a heat maceration in order to extract the anti-inflammatory compounds and you don't want to take it internally i definitely don't recommend you take it internally but it can really help to alleviate bruises and tendons [43:09] sprains and tears just by rubbing the oil on the affected area immediately after the injury and it works it works really really well i've seen lots of evidence for it myself it's one of those uh how does it do that how does it shock the inflammation maybe dr p understands the physiological effect of uh of arnica i don't know nope you don't okay all right um okay so that that's that one there's no more quarters okay so um dr i wanted to ask you about the um cells communication from one cell to another you were talking how they can communicate to each other and i think there is also a study that you mentioned to me about cells communicating even through uh like a piece of plastic um yeah that was um the gurbaches in the 1920s and 30s were demonstrating that if you used um quartz that passes certain frequencies of ultraviolet they demonstrated that uh cells could stimulate cell division across the thin sheet of quartz and uh that is being [44:19] taken up again in the last 10 years uh more people demonstrating uh coherence uh there are um variations on that uh one person is arguing and and demonstrating that that cells sense and respond to infrared frequencies but uh the most of work is in the uh ultraviolet frequency of communication okay excuse me how you mentioned uh may one ho and then the other person was albert sin sin gents could you spell his name please saint george sz ent hyphen g y or g yi okay sense gorgeous okay good okay so the main thing the main thing in in in our bodies is that everything communicates properly it's when things don't communicate properly that the problems occur [45:21] so in terms of um i know you've mentioned before from an energetic point of view the use of thyroid hormone or improving your diet to improve your own hormone uh thyroid function that communication is is benefited by a higher energy and that's the function of thyroid um yes the um carbon dioxide is one of the uh sort of a hormone of metabolism it it acts like a universal hormone uh keeping everything in the optimal condition for example it holds histamine and serotonin in a bound position uh holds calcium in a bound position so if you just hyperventilate and lower your co2 uh within a minute your platelets for example which uh carry [46:25] most of the serotonin in your blood in a harmless state just a minute of hyperventilation will cause the platelets to release the serotonin and immediately cause capillaries to become permeable leaking fluid out into your lungs so you can create pulmonary edema with a minute of hyperventilation just because you've messed up the carbon dioxide concentration okay wow okay pretty dangerous huh okay um back to retroviruses a little bit the um because this again is something uh something that i've not been familiar with at all uh i think the way that we we're indoctrinated with um that the way things are supposed to be is that all these little things the viruses they exist and they're all different and they'll cause different different problems from are you are you saying that ultimately we we co-exist [47:26] with a wide range of retroviruses none of which normally give us any problem until some other insult yeah i think uh doosberg said we all contain hundreds of them and we do when when there's an entry to the tissue we do form antibodies and and some people will say that's evidence that they're an alien thing but uh many years ago uh someone did an experiment i think it was rabbit cartilage um they removed a piece of cartilage and they would replace the un-tampered with cartilage in in one group of rabbits and it would just um didn't uh produce any reaction but if they twisted the cartilage it's just enough to damage the structure just as as you would if you fell and twisted your knee or something [48:29] okay and when they put that one back in the same rabbit it produced the rabbit produced antibodies to it like it with an alien thing but what that means about antibodies in the case of our antibodies to retroviruses or whatever is that uh they're part of a cleanup process uh something is is disturbed the antibodies are part of uh preparing the um the situation for our our um phagocytes to go in and uh remove the damaged material okay so we're looking at the immune system instead of this killer attack uh system that just kills and attacks all these different bugs perhaps it's just a rearranging and uh there's house cleaner just goes in there and it just cleans and mops up this little bit of damage here from the milk that's built on the floor and yeah just really recently someone showed that in a traumatic brain injury uh the presence [49:35] of antibodies to the injured tissue corresponds to the healing the absence of the antibodies lets the tissue deteriorate so it's it's pretty well established that it's a cleanup process and in the thyroid people think about autoimmune antibodies as causing the problem but um just an excess of thyroid stimulating hormone because something is blocking the function the pituitary increases its drive against the thyroid gland and that over stimulation causes something like inflammation and the body is cleaning up the uh damaged or stressed thyroid cells when it produces antibodies and so if you keep the thyroid stimulating hormone low enough uh the cleanup will proceed and the antibodies will disappear wow it's very different [50:41] to current under current thinking and what we're all told is is the way it is so that i guess drug companies can sell their drugs it's probably i don't mean to be cynical but it's probably some truth in it for sure okay per those of you who are listening uh you're listening to ask your doctor on k mu d carville 91.1 fm and from now until the end of the show at eight o'clock the next all at least seven minutes uh people who are invited to call in many questions we do have dr rehm and pete here he's a very well published scientist and researcher and uh we're very very pleased to have him on the show uh we've been talking about inflammation and the role of inflammation and all the things that can cause inflammation and how to how to help yourself getting back to uh in case we get any we don't get any calls oh look out we have a caller i think are you on the air hello hi hi you're on the air thanks um i'm sorry i tuned in about midway through i'm not sure if you've covered this but i'm i'm interested in your thoughts on eczema and [51:46] and relationship to leaky gut and digestive stuff okay dr pete what's your view on eczema say it again i didn't hear the lady was asking about eczema in relation to leaky gut and or well uh the uh celiac disease is one of the causes of both skin disease and arthritis the celiac disease among other things will allow endotoxin into your circulation right and uh both thyroid is probably the most common thing associated with just ordinary eczema and uh that's because when your thyroid is low uh the circulation to your intestine is poor the serotonin is high and uh this combination of of endotoxin and uh serotonin for example will [52:48] cause the skin to have abnormal growth patterns would survive this then be in the same category i think so that's so interesting and that's why when um people who have eczema and psoriasis take liver herbs like dandelion and burdock that they notice an improvement it's um generally not enough to cure them but they do notice an improvement the curative effect has to be more of a combination of looking at the whole system like the thyroid and the um the diet and how that influences and overall inflammation but working on the digestive tract definitely makes a big difference with uh eczema and psoriasis thank you and can i ask one more question to relationships with eczema and celiac disease do you think the tests that test you for um gluten allergies are good accurate yeah accurate dr p did you hear that question well uh the blood [53:52] there they can very clearly demonstrate the the enzymes involved in it but i i think gluten is toxic in itself to anyone it's just that some people are more resistant to it um it has an overlap with the transglutaminase enzyme which is um there's a lot of it in the skin and in the intestine and it happens to be an enzyme that's activated by estrogen and i think that's why women have more of the problem with it but it isn't uh that it's the uh some particular uh disease it's that end of that uh gluten gluten is just absolutely uh not intended as a food the seeds [54:53] create uh the protein gluten as a storage form but also as a byproduct it uh discourages animals from eating it because it contains these uh amino acids that contribute to inflammation so the seed intends to cause inflammation in your intestine and a very tough person can withstand it for a long time but it's not a good idea for anyone to eat it and traditionally um Europeans ate bread but it was always soured and the actual souring process does change the gluten into a less allergenic form although some people are still um react adversely to it and soaking it for 12 hours or so increases the protein value tremendously while destroying the gluten so soaking your grains before uh making the bread and then also um souring them for 12 [55:59] hours you know bread now sourdough bread is risen in three or four hours if that maybe even one or two i asked a baker and he said 20 minutes wow so that and that's not enough time for the the cultures in the the starter to actually break down the gluten and change it into a much less allergenic form so traditionally we never ate bread products like we do today and in fact a lot of the european cake recipes don't even call for flour because flour was this highly prized um possession to have in europe and most of the cakes and desserts were made with eggs and milk and sugar and not flour and now statement rules have switched but i know we're running out of time now i mean sorry values have switched and flowers cheap and butter and eggs are expensive well we are coming to the end of the show now we've only got a couple of minutes left and i don't want to rush the information that we'd like you to know about uh dr pete's website so thank you so much again [57:00] for joining us dr pete and sharing all of your knowledge with us okay okay so for all of those people that have listened uh dr aim and pete's got a very good website with a pretty extensive list of uh referenced material on many different subjects from uh thyroid to um progesterone and other related hormones to the fish oil experiments uh and many many other things so do take a look his website is uh w w w dot re peat dot com and that's the r a y p e a t and guess what he's not selling anything okay very good information well researched um yeah can't say enough good things about him and in a lot of very positive situations turn around using his advice so thank you very much and we did have one last caller who wanted to caution people that i i assume from her own experience that soaking the wheat does not take care of her allergy allergy issues okay yeah be warned yeah no it definitely um a lot of people still have um difficulty eating grain products not just [58:06] wheat and then gluten containing grains but a lot of different uh grain products even with soaking because they the probably the main reason is because they the effects they have on the intestines maybe we can cover that in the next show but we can be reach under and um myself sarah can be reached um like i gave my number out before 707-986-9506 or toll free 888-926-4372 and that the acronym for that is WBM herb western botanical medicine WBM herb HERB for further consultations or more information thank you and thank you and good night now happy new year to you it's 2011 hopefully it's yeah hopefully it's going to go on for a bit longer well you could talk about that later too okay have a good night thank you thank you for listening [59:15] you um It is 8 o'clock and you are tuned into the greatest radio station on the planet and that [1:00:29] is Redwood Community Radio, KMU. Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio. If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMU-D or renewing if you've already joined. A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount. Help us keep free speech alive. Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio. If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMU-D or renewing if you've already joined. A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount. Help us keep free speech alive. Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio. If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMU-D or renewing if you've already joined. A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount. Help us keep free speech alive.