---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Sodium, Salt, Inflammation, Pregnancy Toxeamia, Water Retention
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwmDaU4zQ8o
  mirrors: 
    - https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-111216-water-retention-salt.mp3
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/kmud-111216-water-retention-salt.mp3
    - https://askyourherbdoctor.com/audio/2011%20Sodium,%20Salt,%20Inflammation,%20Pregnancy%20Toxeamia,%20Water%20Retention%20Dec%202011.mp3
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/kmud-111216-water-retention-salt.vtt
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwmDaU4zQ8o
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-26"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-26"
ray-peat-rodeo:
  prev-paths:
    - /water-retention-and-salt
---
 [0:00] Now, this month we want to explore the misconceptions surrounding water retention and the medical advice to avoid salt, as well as the over-prescription of diuretics with a special reference to Toxemia of Late Pregnancy and the role of inflammation and poor energy reserves as a cause for concern. We're going to be joined here by Dr. Raymond Peat here in a couple of minutes, but you're listening to ask your Dr. Ron K. M. U. D. Garberville, 91.1 FM, and from 7.30 until the eight end of the show, excuse me, at eight o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of salt, inflammation and diuretics. The number here if you live in the area is 923-3911, or if you live outside the area the toll-free number is 1-800-568-3723, so that's 1-800-KM-UD-RAD. [1:05] And this is the last show for this year, for 2011, and we'll be with you back again in 2012. Okay, so hopefully Dr. Peat will be with us. I think actually it looks like they're still trying to get him on the line here. So this month's show, again, as I said, is going to be mainly looking at the topics of salt avoidance with respect to water retention and opening up that misconception with facts and science supporting the use of salt rather than the avoidance of salt for decreasing water retention. And also look at Dr. Tom Brewer's research work, pioneering research work on toxemia of late pregnancy. So for those women that are listening, probably a very noteworthy part of the show will be based on that toxemia, and the things that Dr. Brewer have proved to reduce swelling and actually reduce the actual occurrence of toxemia completely. [2:07] His diet was very instrumental in making a new way of looking at toxemia, because pretty much the medical advice for women with toxemia was actually counterintuitive in many cases. So hopefully Dr. Peat's with us on the show. Hi Dr. Peat. Hi there. Okay, so once again, Dr. Peat's joining us to illuminate the way, as it were, then through the misconceptions that we so often repeat as truth. So thank you for joining us, Dr. Peat. Again, would you please describe your academic and professional background for listeners maybe new to the show who perhaps have never heard your name? I studied biology, physiology at the University of Oregon, and have taught various hormone and nutrition related courses as well as in other fields, psychology and philosophy included. [3:09] Okay, so your main interests I know have been around the looking into hormones and much of your research has given you new insights into the treatment of many situations and conditions with hormones like progesterone, pregnanolone and others. In terms of the, I think perhaps we should start with something like modern diuretics. So we come into contact with people that for one reason or another are using diuretics to decrease water retention, whether it's ankles, fingers or cardiac water retention. Is there any safe diuretics that you know of that are prescription medications in terms of the way that they act? Oh, yeah, there are some that are relatively safe, but it's the whole theory behind why [4:11] they exist that is the problem. Mercury compounds used to be used basically they just kill the kidney cells and let stuff leak out. And they were the common diuretics for a very long time until the 1950s. New compounds came on the market that had a variety of effects on the kidneys. And it was really the promotion of those that created an ideology that diuretics are really the key to treating heart disease and several other problems such as toxin-meo-pregnancy. But really I think it's mostly a marketing strategy to orient physiology around making [5:17] the kidneys leak out more water. The real problem is what causes the water retention and almost anything that seriously enters the organism causes water retention. Like a problem following surgery very often is that the person stops forming urine and shock, any very serious sickness is going to in many ways cause the reduced ability to form urine properly. And it's sort of a plumber's approach to physiology to think of just opening up the kidneys and letting the liquid out faster. [6:17] So from a herbal perspective dandelion leaf is a little bit less effective than the dandelion leaf but it works as a diuretic and that's what I thought they had created verusimide from. Although then with verusimide I know you have to have a prescription of potassium along with it and dandelion leaf or most green leaves have a lot of potassium so it just kind of works out that you don't need to take potassium if you use dandelion leaf as a diuretic. What would you consider verusimide as a safe diuretic? It's got a long history of use and it probably does have an actual beneficial effect on survival but with almost any leaf extract the potassium and magnesium are going to have a diuretic effect that is probably safer than the actual function on the kidneys. [7:20] Oh that's interesting. Okay so the inflammation in the first place is the main cause in many cases for the cessation of diuresis and the increase in water retention in the cells through damage. So you're saying that it's much more important to look at what's causing that inflammation and trying to get to the root of the problem rather than just describe a diuretic. Yeah even before the inflammation there's the energy problem and something as simple as drinking too much water in relation to the energy your body is producing. For example a low thyroid person who can't produce much metabolic energy is very susceptible to drinking too much water and getting a very general disruption of their physiology. A pint or so of water passing suddenly through your stomach to your intestine causes a surge [8:29] of serotonin release and that's simply a model of stress or shock in general. Anything that shocks you or stresses you tends to start the same process but just a surge of water hitting the intestine is enough to increase serotonin which then stimulates the production of prolactin and prolactin is associated with water retention. Serotonin itself is in a direct way and serotonin increases the production of aldosterone which produces water retention and inflammation and sets off a chain of reactions that lead to such things as heart failure. And the unfortunate thing is when someone is low thyroid they're usually very very thirsty [9:31] all the time anyway so they crave that water and they think they have to have that water in order because will they save their bodies really craving it? Yeah it causes the tissues to retain water even though it's passing through them through the kidneys mostly and they aren't producing much evaporation through their lungs or skin but it tends to leak out of their bloodstream into the tissues and produce edema and edema is harmful to all of the tissues in the direct way it turns on a whole anabolic system shifting away from oxidative metabolism activating lipolysis the release of fatty acids shifting [10:37] cell metabolism towards burning fat rather than sugar imitating diabetes and aging so it's a generalized shock physiology that's involved when cells get waterlogged it can start with low thyroid but it feeds back and makes the low thyroid problem worse. So that's why you said that even if any kind of leaf extractor you know tea made from a leaf of a plant is going to have minerals in it that help prevent this from happening and if you sip on it you would make it be made of cup of tea you'd sip on it slowly you wouldn't just drink it down like a pint of water yeah and the minerals it isn't essential that it be magnesium and potassium calcium and sodium have many of the same functions even though each thing has its place in the mechanisms if you're in shock you can relieve [11:45] the symptoms pretty much by taking more of any one of the alkaline minerals of potassium sodium magnesium or calcium in heart failure and lung inflammation and the things that happen with shock or aging or any serious disease the lungs and the heart tend to get waterlogged and lose function just giving a very concentrated salt solution intravenously will relieve the symptoms very often they've doubled the survival or cut the mortality rate in half by just giving extra sodium intravenously why is a very interesting point that you've you've just opened up there [12:48] because that begs the question why is it so often that doctors avoid tell people to avoid salt and why is salt so maligned heavily as a problem element especially when they are swelling and then here they're using it in surgery so I mean it really I think got us big boost around 1950 when the diuretics came on the market they they found the diuretics took sodium out at the same time they took water out right and so they said you you should get the same effect by restricting the sodium intake and they applied that to pregnant women and Tom Brewer and some other people wrote about the horrible effects of sodium restriction in pregnancy plus using [13:51] diuretic if you combine the two you get something bad serious effects after I had been reading now Tom Brewer's work for a long time I was seeing similarities between premenstrual syndrome and the toxinia of pregnancy that he had worked on and I finally decided to suggest to young women who are having premenstrual water retention and not having any good results just by stopping their salt intake I suggested that they follow Brewer's prescription to increase their salt intake when they were having edema water retention problems and to go according to their craving for [14:51] salt rather than avoiding the craving the first person that tried it just had a total avoidance of premenstrual water retention very first month she tried it and how much salt did she add? quite a lot what like a teaspoon a couple times a day or a quarter teaspoon? she shook it on even if the food was already salted she would just add more lots more onto it and just absolutely stopped right from then on never had a water retention problem again I wonder do you know why or where the mechanism for which doctors will tell you that salt is you know it causes you could increase the risk of stroke heart attack and just generally very bad for your cardiovascular system and so people should avoid salt at all costs so where do you think that mistaken ideologies come from? David McCarron 30 or 40 years ago was studying the [15:55] issue and he looked at the figures that the government published that that recommendation was based on and he saw that if you look at the figures carefully the people who eat the least salt had the highest blood pressure the people who ate the most salt had the lowest blood pressure and he saw what the figures really showed that led to misinterpretation was that low calcium intake was associated with the hypertension and the sodium was really there sort of as an innocent bystander associated with the calcium deficiency so you're saying that that calcium deficiency is more responsible for hypertension? yeah David McCarron I think has probably written maybe 150 articles on the subject I think he was at Stanford or some California University when [17:02] he started saying it's not high sodium it's low calcium that causes hypertension and I think that university invited him to leave oh now isn't this I'm sorry to interrupt you but am I thinking right when you've mentioned in the past that low low calcium intakes cause calcium to leak out of the bones and into the blood and that causes the calcification of the arteries eventually which gives it a hypertension is that part of the mechanism? yeah that's the the essential idea yeah the low calcium intake among other things increases your parathyroid hormone which pulls calcium out of your bones and favors its movement into cells of all kinds and when calcium is taken up by cells it stimulates them and tends to make them contract [18:03] and that's one of the places that thyroid and the energy production comes into the question because carbon dioxide produced by the action of thyroid carbon dioxide keeps calcium out of cells even if you breathe in a bag and increase your carbon dioxide or take baking soda or whatever the carbon dioxide will relax your blood vessels by helping the calcium to move out of the blood vessels and back into the bones okay so even are we are you thinking along the lines of even relatively short-term exposure to higher blood levels of calcium and or tissues endothelia picking up the calcium can contribute to that lack of elasticity that will [19:03] be more character is that more characteristic of high blood pressure and hypertension? yeah each of these things sets in in motion a whole whole sequence of events the low carbon dioxide which lets calcium get in the cells and excite them and tighten up the blood vessels for example okay it low carbon dioxide also lets the platelets release their serotonin and the serotonin besides adding to the tension of the blood vessels makes them permeable and leaky so that the water isn't retained in the bloodstream but leaks through into the the cells and the cells that are taking up calcium are also taking up water so basically 2000 milligrams of calcium is a really important thing for somebody with hypertension to start in implementing into their [20:09] regime um yeah and supporting it with the other minerals the facts that David McCarran looked at showed that this inverse connection between salt and blood pressure the high salt eaters actually had lower blood pressure and one of the things that is involved there is that sodium helps the cell stimulates the cell to expel calcium the sodium activates the thyroid function and the thyroid function pushes calcium out of the cell and lets the cell relax right because you know you've mentioned the relaxation effect from thyroid so that's also a direct I know it's a little bit confusing probably for our listeners with this talking about calcium inside and outside of cells but basically the salt helps to put the calcium where it should be and not being [21:11] deposited in the um your arteries and the cells in your arteries so I'm just trying to make that a little bit more understood there okay well it's um you're listening to ask Europe doctor on KMUD Garberville 91.1 FM and from 7 30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of salt inflammation and diuretics the number here if you live in the area is nine two three three nine one one or if you live outside the area a toll free number is one eight hundred KMUD rad and we're pleased once again to have dr. Raymond Pete to join us and to bring out some of the misconceptions that we all have in the past and one of those misconceptions is that salt it's bad for you and salt will increase your heart attack or give you stroke and that salt is not what you need if you've got swelling in edema but actually as we're finding out salt is very important to decrease edema hi dr. Pete thanks for thanks for doing that I think there was a pretty bad hiss on the line [22:14] so hopefully it's going to be clearer now yeah now that sounds much better thank you yeah okay good okay so get getting back to uh the um diet that Tom Brewer um bought about for the treatment of toxemia of late pregnancy and a diet which actually resulted in none of his hundreds if not no thousands of clients or patients who were pregnant ever getting toxemia he was very big on uh drinking and drinking quite a bit of milk was part of his uh part of his diet and well there's the calcium keeping the calcium yeah also salt and lots of protein right and there's the main things that he was suggesting yeah he was talking about the protein and adding salt to your food but um the milk has other things besides the protein the calcium has its direct effect on blood pressure and the the sugar of milk it has its diuretic like action so the the calcium and [23:23] sugar add to the uh quality of the protein now we talked a little bit about the uh we've mentioned fruzomide as a diuretic um is there any safer effective diuretics that that we wouldn't perhaps think of diuretics perhaps um if you think of the um sequence of stress effects that I mentioned uh too much water uh leading to too much serotonin and aldosterone and prolactin which are all inflammatory sorry to interrupt but those are all inflammatory compounds yeah and cause water retention and uh if you choose your um substances with reference to uh inhibiting any or all of those uh that's going to be an anti-edema anti-inflammatory [24:27] diet or treatment thyroid and progesterone for example lower all of these things progesterone is a very powerful antagonist to aldosterone um and uh drugs are being developed to be very similar to progesterone but to be patentable so they can sell them as pre heart failure and water retention and inflammation and so on well did they not have the same effect as the progesterone um enough that that they'll cure heart failure and such but they have their own side effects they're just trying to make them as similar to progesterone as they can to minimize the side effects but using any of the natural steroids derived from pregnant alone either progesterone or dha will help with [25:34] water retention and edema and heart failure and so on and that's because they're antagonizing the effects of aldosterone yeah and aldosterone is causing the inflammation and the water retention yeah and aldosterone increases besides inflammation it leads to fibrosis and prolonged heart failure and and vascular and kidney disease and so on lead to fibrosis lung disease everywhere that water retention and inflammation start they tend to end up with fibrosis okay so um uh 60 or 70 years ago uh researcher uh lipshoots called pregnant alone and progesterone the anti-fibromatogenic steroids they start out inhibiting uh fibric fibrous overproduction [26:35] and end up protecting against tumors wow okay we'll try calling Dr. P back hello hi call you on there yeah this is topical you you're just catching on on calcium i don't know if you want to go to specific i'll give you a short story about nine months ago i was at icu per a week and a half because my calcium was crazy i was later diagnosed with sarcoidosis and my doctor wants me to get down on my calcium level uh are you saying that your calcium level was high when yes very high and he's shut down my kidneys etc etc uh that was nine ten months ago i i once a month i do a calcium level check right blood test do you know what your calcium is huh do you know what your calcium value is i don't god i wish i did the number but the problem is he's got me on 15 milligrams of [27:38] prednisone oh dear to keep my calcium level down and i love milk yeah well the the prednisone i'm sure is because the uh as a i know i hate prednisone yeah as an anti-inflammatory steroid so because yeah sarcoids and inflammatory so i know that clouds the issue but i think he's using a prednisone to keep the calcium levels down but the way you talk sounds like calcium levels are pretty good idea well calcium not in the blood but in the bones which is where the calcium should be so consuming adequate dietary calcium in the form of powdered eggshells or consuming dairy in the form of milk getting about 2000 milligrams of calcium a day will actually let you store the calcium in your bones and that's what i do and prevent it from being in your bloodstream which is what happens when you don't take up enough dietary calcium so when uh you said your blood levels were high that's because your bones were allowing the calcium that was in the bones to leak out into your blood supply and that's that's caused more of the problem but the best way to lower your blood calcium would [28:43] be to intake intake in enough dietary calcium okay now and that does help blood blood pressure is affected that way as well yeah but that would also cause what dr. pete was talking about with calcium is that calcium in the endothelia which is the tissue within the lining right of the arterial of the end of the arteries and the arterial is a vascular supply that's under high pressure that is actually made more stretching elastic by not having calcium taken up into it which happens when there's too much calcium in the blood and not enough in the bones your body through parathyroid starts to pull out calcium from the bone and yeah we want it to the reverse exactly so making sure you have a high enough dietary intake of calcium will be the best which would be a lot of dairy products well it doesn't have to be dairy products dairy products are very good and we do recommend milk intake protein and no four four to six just dealing with a good dairy four to six glasses okay of whole milk if you're in our overweight or two [29:45] percent if you don't want the fats right I do one of the other best ways of achieving high calcium in your dietary intake will be capsules of powdered eggshell oh really yeah I mean what Dr. Pete's always talked about in the past is taking your eggshells and just washing them out washing that membrane out from the outside storing them till you have 10 or a dozen or so and then put in putting them in the oven at about 350 on a baking bake right a cookie sheet and then and then put them into a coffee grinder yeah electric coffee grinder okay and then that resulting powder you can take about a half a teaspoon a day will give you about a quarter teaspoon three times a day is just over 2,000 milligrams so yeah so that 2,000 milligrams of calcium there will be very beneficial in terms of decreasing your blood calcium but increasing your uptake of calcium into your bones and we've seen this with our with our clients we've seen that they they have a high calcium level in their blood okay so just one last thing I'll tell you and then we'll move [30:52] on to the next caller what we've seen is when people have high calcium in their blood it's because they're not getting enough in their diet when they start supplementing their diet with a higher calcium level at closer to 2,000 milligrams 2,000 milligrams is about two quarts milk or we told you about the egg shell a quarter teaspoon three times a day is about 2,000 milligrams or you can do some of both but then you'll see the blood you're involved okay okay the blood calcium level come down to a normal range which is all right I'm definitely trying the eggshells I'm 75 years old and the sarcogeosis whatever it is definitely put me on the fritz the other thing that you should do in conjunction with that is actually supplement with the vitamin D all right I've got that yeah the calcium and vitamin D work fairly synergistically so yeah I had kind of reverse opinion I thought lust was best well no because you want to bring your blood levels down right by making sure you're back to the bone give it back to the bone right exactly yeah all right so thank you very much I love you next call recall thank you for your call [31:58] thank you thank you bye bye hi you're on the air hello hi you're on the air hi it's your normal engineer hi thank you so I got chickenpox which is going around oh yeah and I was wondering if you know some anti or you know I was wondering what your recommendation would be and also I had learned from you guys that coconut fat is antiviral yes so I'm actually using that as a solve on my source and I was wondering if you thought that was a good idea yeah an internal would be good oh yeah I'm picking a ton of coconut milk too yeah internally what you do you've never had chickenpox before then okay then now's your first time how bad is it oh I think I've been told it's going to get worse I've only had it for a day right because in adults it's generally more yeah what more severe they say than in children um yeah from a point of view of uh anti-infectives at this point being a being a viral situation um I don't know how much how much can be done that quickly I think your own body will certainly get on top of it um I don't think there's anything per se that's [32:59] going to really knock it back now that you you're coming out with it in terms of your skin and the lesions there then there'll be things that you can do to kind of minimize the itching which is probably one of the main symptoms um of the chickenpox not yet but that's what I've heard yeah well when the when the vesicles burst they're kind of fluid filled and when they burst um they'll they'll then become quite itchy because it's that's a that's a condition it's just like shingles and herpes the same kind of varicellus osteo it's the same kind of family so they all have this kind of weeping characteristic where the fluid feels vesicles burst and and then they get very itchy so in in England I know that calamine lotion is not exactly herbal but um calamine lotion uh was a fairly good soothing calming topical application what is calamine lotion if i know i'm not sure what calamine is i could probably you could probably look at i'd google it i'm sure um but it's basically a liquid that you will put on with cotton cotton wool [34:00] damp cotton wool and rub it on you know dab it on the skin in those areas that are particularly itchy um i'm trying to think if there would be anything else that would be more uh systemic that you could use as a uh anti-prioritic you know to stop the itch oh maybe if we get dr p back on he'll have some suggestions but i'm afraid the engineers wrestling with the phone and but dr p is still out of action at this point so i don't quite know what's happened well i'll keep listening thank you very much yeah i'm i feel feel bad for you i'm i hope you have a happy christmas anyway despite this because it's probably going to be another seven to ten days i think before you know it's kind of getting resolved but i'll ask dr p as i'm going to be getting back on the edge to see what his advice would be but i'm sure uh calamine lotion could be something that you could look up and i think that's a topical application that would be pretty good i know that he'll probably mention other things that would probably be better so let's just see if we can get him back with us thank you yeah you're very welcome and happy new year and happy christmas huh okay dr p did we manage to we've got dr p back on the line yet we don't have dr p back on the [35:07] line okay i'm not sure what's going on uh do we have any more callers on the line if i had a question um you were talking about the co2 levels and um i have been studying a little bit the buteco method which is some exercise which will actually increase the co2 levels okay good and um you know as you mentioned it can increase the relaxation and for me it helps with things like insomnia and i'm curious in relation to what you're talking about i didn't quite get the full picture of what the co2 levels like raising those co2 levels what impact that might have right okay well dr p's talk fairly extensively about the benefits of co2 i think most of us always associate co2 as a poisonous gas that we need to get rid of by exhaling when actually i think the truth in the science is that oxygen itself is probably more poisonous than co2 and co2 in its own right is actually very anti-inflammatory and um actually associated with greater longevity [36:08] peoples and cultures that live at high altitudes like the tibetans and the people in the peruvian andes have actually much much greater uh health health records actually have much less inflammatory disease they have way less cancer incidences and generally the inflammation is much less amongst communities at high elevation because of the beneficial effects of co2 and dr p has mentioned several times the method by which you can just bag breathe you get a brown paper bag and sit down in the chair and relax and just breathe in and out of rebreathing your own co2 now this is also a very good way of increasing co2 levels so i think the main effects were the anti-inflammatory anti-stress effects of breathing in co2 and also the longevity effects that do come with it are well well documented okay thank you very much yeah you're very welcome okay um is there [37:09] any more calls online hi hi um so i just had a recommendation for the hello there was a caller there but they suddenly disappeared dr pete are you on the line no i don't think the call is there okay well sarah how about you so um hello it's a meltdown in the studio you're doing a good job there engineer just there's a bit of a problem here we had a fuzzy connection to start with with dr pete on the line and then can we cut him off well okay bag breathing is another way that you can help to lower height since we've been talking about high blood pressure bag breathing is also very good to help lower someone's blood pressure because it helps with that co2 and putting calcium in the right place so that's another use for that and we talked about the anti-stress effects and the anti [38:11] edema effects of increased co2 as well and that's the high elevation uh civilization so also had way less stress and way less inflammatory uh diseases so i wonder if they have less heart disease that being interesting epidemiological study well you're listening to ask your air doctor on kmed galva bill 91.1 fm and from now till the end of the show at eight o'clock people are invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's topic of salt inflammation and diuretics the number here if you live in the area is nine two three three nine one one or if you live outside the area the numbers one eight hundred km ud rad so if there are any people that have been listening to the show uh would like to call me if any questions please feel free to do so now um otherwise uh we're going to still see if we can get dr pete back on the air hello hi you're on the air yeah um so i've been listening to the the show today and um it all sounded very interesting to me but uh i'm uh curious how [39:14] it could pertain to athletes uh it seems like diuretic salt calcium all very uh critical in sport um i don't know if you've been able to get the doctor back on i think they're still working at it but what was your what was your main question in relation to uh the topic in sport well yeah you know i i always have to calculate things like sweat loss uh to then uh calculate how much uh i need to intake during sport i i particularly practice uh a lot of running and cycling sports and um i was curious how to calculate uh salt how much salt intake i should be taking okay well how much do you take in generally well all my supplements uh usually they're sports supplements uh have a certain amount of sodium in them and i take the recommended dosages of those but they're you know two scoops of uh of the uh product to 20 ounces of water uh per hour [40:22] but again i don't know if that's the adequate amount or if the doctor is saying that maybe we should be thinking higher levels of sodium well i do know that there's been a study that's been done with baking soda showing that athletes performed better when they took up to a tablespoon of baking soda in one day spread out obviously because you don't want to be diluting your stomach acid when you're trying to digest some proteins with a meal but that's um because it increases their co2 and you're as an athlete you're blowing off a lot of co2 when you're exercising especially with all that heavy aerobic exercise and it would be very good for you to um have constant almost like you want an ivy of glucose while you're exercising ivy of glucose and all these minerals so that you can you don't put your body into a stressed state and you'll actually cope better with the endurance exercise okay so so in reference to uh co2 um am i actually [41:22] looking to put my body in a slightly more hypoxic state yeah because well no you are putting your yeah you're over oxygenating yourself when you're doing aerobic exercise because you're blowing off so much co2 which is actually a very negative thing to do but in effect the carbon dioxide is pulling more oxygen through your cell system did the caller hear that or we've got the caller and you on the line i'm still on the line good could you hear dr p i i didn't hear what he said no okay sorry dr p can you repeat that yeah the carbon dioxide acts as if it's pulling more oxygen into the cell system it activates the uh electron transport chain to use oxygen more quickly and effectively so that was what is what would happen when the this astley would take baking soda uh yeah um they've done it with um endurance races uh giving them a tablespoon [42:26] of baking soda at the start of the race and uh the um you would think that it would make the more alkaline alkaline is um not necessarily good state the um carbon dioxide actually enters the cell and becomes an acidic form from the um the baking soda bicarbonate momentarily makes your blood more alkaline but the absorbed carbon dioxide uh becomes acidic inside the cell and the intracellular state should be slightly on the acid side when when the oxygen is really working they call it oxygen because it means acid former and the acid that it makes is carbon dioxide and in that slightly acidic state [43:28] oxygens having its full action for producing energy and it's that same uh energy production which takes the calcium out of the cell and lets the cell relax and recuperate properly um if you aren't producing or retaining enough carbon dioxide the cell will begin making lactic acid and the lactic acid leaves the cell in an alkaline stressed condition even though it's acidifying the blood it's leaving the cell in a stressed alkaline condition that causes inflammation so too much aerobic exercise becomes catabolic and uh inflammatory right caller so are you there caller did you hear what dr pete said yes yes i did perfect very good information thank you yeah you're very welcome and do you have anything else you wanted to want to say i don't want to thank you very thank you very much [44:32] for answering my question okay you're very welcome all right so i think we have two more callers here so let's take them one at a time and see if we can get through them before we get closer to the top of the hour you're on the air cooler hello am i on yes you're on okay i have a suggestion and also a question for dr pete um i live in leightonville and last year i discovered a product down in willis at mariposa that is incredible for itching and um i got it for poison oak and it's called manzanita magic and it comes in a three ounce bottle it is wild crafted manzanita grape root plantain chickweed organic sage thyme and cayenne and it's uh dark liquid and i'm just wondering if that would work for um chicken pot and that's just my [45:34] suggestion my question is that's well let me just say one thing quickly about that that's a wonderful product and i know the lady who makes it and that's a really good idea so thanks for calling in and letting us know that and michael if you're still listening get yourself some manzanita magic terry makes it did you mention aspirin fruit chicken pox no we didn't so i would like you to talk about that if you if you would put the color tonight yeah let's let the color finish and then i'll get off the line um it's about calcium and getting it back into your bones um i've been dealing with um breast cancer since 2005 and had to really pay attention to trying to keep calcium in my bones and i would like to know my understanding is that it's specifically vitamin d3 that um assist with calcium going into the bones and i also i'd like dr p to comment on that and also on the ratio of calcium and magnesium that he might recommend and i'll take my answer off the air [46:37] thank you thank you for your call dr p did you hear that question yeah the ratio isn't as big an issue as as a lot of books say if you're getting a little excess sodium and calcium it spares the magnesium the sodium and calcium activate cell respiration and cell respiration is needed for cells to retain magnesium so if you're low in sodium and calcium you depend on a good thyroid function to retain magnesium so any stress that increases albostrone for example is going to make you lose magnesium so keeping your albostrone and inflammation down your thyroid calcium and sodium up is going to make you retain magnesium much more efficient place [47:40] all right we got three callers in five minutes we won't we won't get them done in five minutes but first let's go back dr p would you first give some more suggestions for michael our engineer who's got chicken box at the moment okay um aspirin has been found to have a mild antiviral effect against several types of virus uh someone with aids sent me an old publication that they'd begun a trial of aspirin for hiv infected people and they were getting good results when they discontinued the study but it has been proven somewhat effective for several different kinds including the herpes or chicken pox type and michael call um call us we'll give our number out at the end of the show in case you don't have it and we'll help direct you with the amount of vitamin k you need to take in order to use aspirin safely and also another thing dr can you please comment about vitamin d for that lady with the calcium she wanted to know [48:45] why vitamin d was so important um you know you if you're having blood tests it's good to have your um vitamin d3 in the upper part of the normal range and uh it would also be good to have the parathyroid hormone checked when you're getting enough vitamin d and calcium you will inhibit the parathyroid hormone and the parathyroid hormone although it has its place you don't want it to be chronically elevated because it's a cancer promoter yeah and we have um another three colors on the line let's at least take one it's we've got two minutes left here we're getting lots of stress here in the studio and it's one minute to eight it's hilarious so let's i'm sorry caller to have cut you short with that recommendation that for everybody's sanity we need to make sure that we close the show at eight o'clock pronto and thank you so much for all those people that have called in and uh thank you engineer for dealing with the stress associated with losing [49:49] callers and our beloved dr p thank you so much for joining us again okay um and we're just going to give out some contact details yeah contact details for dr raymond p visit his website please w w w dot r a y p e a t dot com that's ray peak dot com lots of scholarly articles fully reference scientific literature it's uh yeah open your eyes folks and don't go and take a look at what he's got on the website that will refute a lot of the misconceptions thank you to all those people that have phoned in
