---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Weight Gain, Foamy Urine, Fats, Light Therapy, Dreams
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-130215-weight-gain.mp3
  mirrors:
    - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcHLZSBTcCc
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/kmud-130215-weight-gain.mp3
    - https://askyourherbdoctor.com/audio/2013%20Weight%20Gain,%20Foamy%20Urine,%20Fats,%20Light%20Therapy,%20Dreams%20Feb%202013.mp3
    - https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-130215-weight-gain-transcription.doc
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/kmud-130215-weight-gain.vtt
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-130215-weight-gain-transcription.doc
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-24"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-24"
---
 [0:00] Well once again, excuse me, we're very welcome to have Dr. Raymond Peep to share his expertise on the subject tonight. Again one of those subjects related to something that he has a lot of experience with through his research into thyroid and progesterone, other related compounds that are essential if you like for healthy metabolism and for anti-stress, anti-aging effects. So thanks so much for joining us again this month Dr. Peep. Thanks. Okay so I think as usual we want to give the benefit to those listeners perhaps who haven't heard of you or haven't tuned into this show before, the benefit of your past experience so if you wouldn't mind just detailing your academic professional career to those people. After I had taught linguistics and inclusion such for a while I decided to go to graduate school in biology, University of Oregon and graduated there with my PhD in 1972 with specializing [1:09] in physiology and biochemistry especially reproductive physiology and right after I left university I worked for a while with a diet company counseling people in weight loss. So that was 41 years ago. Yeah. Okay well hopefully we're going to cover quite a lot of material here tonight because I know that the subject surrounding tonight's topic of weight gain or how to avoid it and what causes it etc etc will be pretty pertinent to a lot of people even if they're not overtly overweight. So I think one of the main things just to let people know about apart from anything else is that you do actually have a pretty active Facebook fan page Dr. Pete whether you know it or not I don't know but it's an active repeat Facebook fan page for those of you who are familiar with Facebook and use it that's something perhaps you might want to look at. There's a pretty lively debate and forum surrounding most of those topics that we've covered with [2:14] Dr. Pete over the last few years. So I think one of those things that has come out of the forum and I know it's something that we've noticed ourselves but that's not to say that it's unavoidable because it certainly is and that's going to be the discussion of tonight's show. I think one of those things that people are asking each other on the Facebook page is how people can adopt your diet and not expect any weight gain. I know the thing that most people have talked about is some extra weight around the abdomen in relation to your specifications for diet. So Sarah what do you think? Well I just think that you know that's quite a broad statement there. It is very broad. And basically you can't say that when people adopt Dr. Pete's diet because you know if we say milk is good for you and you go and you start drinking a half a gallon of whole milk a day you know you're going to put on weight unless you basically cut out all other [3:17] calories. So you know this is where I think people get confused like well how much milk should I drink and should I if I don't want to gain weight should I drink whole milk or low fat or you know. And the same with cheese too. I advise eating cheese because of its high calcium and protein content but you have to consider the calories because some cheese has practically no fat, others are basically like soft butter for the fat content. Like brie or chef. Yeah. Well Dr. Pete I guess what I wanted to start off with first then was I'm asking you this that one of the main components to weight management then is a functional energy reserve coupled with a healthy metabolism and this is your expertise so would you outline perhaps what constitutes a healthy metabolism in terms of what we know as glucose oxidation versus the opposite the fatty acid metabolism that occurs with stress so our listeners can tell [4:20] the difference. Before you answer that Dr. Pete just to say that you've told us before that if somebody has an unhealthy metabolism they'll have a hard time burning 1200 or 1000 calories a day. Yeah there was a study about 30 or 40 years ago in which doctors used to follow the textbook standard that everyone can lose weight if they eat less than 1700 calories a day because that was a study done in the 20s or 30s on healthy people and so they put a group of women who claimed that they were gaining weight on 1000 calories put them in a closed ward and actually counted how much food they were eating and some of them could maintain their weight on 700 calories a day especially women who had dieted a lot because several adaptations [5:20] happened to chronic poorly balanced dieting the thyroid flows down and especially the muscle tissues atrophy from the stress of dieting and if you think of the stress metabolism as being very similar to the diabetic metabolism basically you shift over to burning fat rather than sugar. The at rest your brain and red blood cells need sugar and they'll keep burning it regardless of where they have to get it. If you don't eat enough of the necessary nutrients your body will convert your muscles to sugar to keep feeding your brain what it needs and if you are eating enough sugar or things which [6:24] can be turned into sugar then your body doesn't have to break down its own tissues to make the necessary glucose for your blood cells and brain and in that condition your muscles at rest don't require practically any glucose they can do fine on a pure fat diet but that's the resting muscle if your muscles are under stress very intense exercise the muscles will begin burning almost pure sugar so it's the massive muscle at rest which will burn fat calories and leave the protein for your functioning tissues and sugar to sustain your essential brain and immune system and such. So this is why you're an advocate of muscle building because then it helps convert your [7:29] fat into well it helps your body to burn the fat for fuel rather than just using the sugar. And when the muscle is stressed it begins actually producing estrogen when you're building muscle in a safe way the muscle begins producing testosterone actually right in the muscle which helps the rest of the body. The heart is one of the main targets of testosterone. So well-developed skeletal muscles are actually sustaining the heart muscle as well as the brain and the lungs which need the stabilizing anti-inflammatory steroids. So is this why they find that when there's muscly people that they have longer life spans? One of the reasons you think? Well yeah everything that tends to kill you shrinks your muscles. [8:32] Freolty is the basic thing that associates with aging bones and muscles go away at about the same rate of aging. Okay so getting back to what you've started to outline under what would be regular metabolism for the body to burn glucose preferentially rather than liberating free fatty acids to produce energy. The diet starvation type model would then force your body into utilizing stored fats for energy is that correct? Except when it does add it also needs to make some sugar for your brain and so it breaks down the tissues. The first to go is your thymus which in just a few hours they used to think that adults didn't have a significant amount of thymus tissue because they looked at people who had [9:32] died after being sick and even if you die slowly after a traumatic accident your thymus has gone. It just takes a few hours of intense stress for the thymus to be dissolved and so a long fast will just completely devastate your thymus tissues it turns into sugar very quickly. And that's important for your immune system right? Yeah and the skin is relatively dispensable too in the long run so your skin atrophies very quickly with a fast or even a low calorie diet and then the muscles go you can live months on your muscles providing sugar for your brain if necessary if you have big muscles. But lots of the women that I used to see who were there for a weight loss diet you couldn't [10:34] find a bicep muscle or a calf muscle they couldn't they would try to tighten their muscle and they couldn't feel or find anything either in their upper arm or lower leg. The muscle was maybe the size of a person's index finger and so when they would first start eating a good diet the first thing that would happen would be pounds of water loss their tissue would suddenly come out of the stress condition and get rid of some of the stored water then the muscle would start growing. First week they might lose 10 or 15 pounds of water then for about a month they would start putting on weight as their muscles began growing. Okay because obviously muscle is denser than fat right and so some as a slender person with a well-defined muscular structure would weigh more than a larger person that seemed [11:38] large through fat. Yeah we would have people measure their waist and thighs and hips and each week they would get smaller that's the gain weight. Okay as they started leaning and toning up they shrunk in volume or they increased in mass. Well so what about athletes and you know like long distance runners people that are very thin and lean how healthy would you say their metabolism is? There was a study of using radioactive testosterone and they not only saw that the runners muscles were atrophied but comparing them to weight lifters who had developed huge skeletal muscles with these isotopes they could make a picture of their heart lungs and brain and so on. [12:39] All of their tissues had atrophied so that the lean long distance runners also had lean flabby hearts very thin hearts in the world. And here that's supposed to be the heart healthy form of exercise. It's a stereotypical picture of health that kind of Kenyan long distance marathon runner. You know a lot of things happen fertility is often reduced because the testosterone goes down and the very immediate thing that you can see in even fairly low intensity exercise is that the lungs lose some of their ability to diffuse oxygen in and carbon dioxide out. The actual substance of the lung air sac thickens with just a fairly moderate amount of continued exercise. Is that an inflammatory process that's causing that? Yeah it's a kind of edema mild inflammation and sports anemia is a recognized thing it's [13:47] a combination of all of those little stresses and shift away from the anabolic testosterone to the females are always relatively anemic because of the influence of the balance of estrogen relative to the androgens and sports anemia is somewhat like the feminizing effective estrogen on the blood system. So the long distance runner has a deformed heart and deformed lungs basically compared to the bodybuilder. Yeah. Okay well let's hold it there for a second you're listening to ask your doctor on KMUD Garberville 91.1 FM and from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions either related or unrelated to this month's subject of weight loss. Our guest speaker here is Dr. Raymond Peake and from 7.30 to late we'll be open for questions [14:48] but Dr. Peake moving on a little bit then in a tangent direction the some people are more predisposed to this kind of inefficient glucose oxidation from other courses like I know you've mentioned Pufa a lot or cortisol dominant type pictures. Yeah lots of things can interfere with your higher rate of metabolism things that suppress your thyroid are the basic most common thing but anything that can increase your cortisol or even your glucagon can interfere with your metabolism slow down your metabolic rate. Serotonin, estrogen for example both lower your body temperature and many stresses can increase those and those tend to increase the glucagon shift you away from being able [15:55] to oxidize the glucose and instead depend on fatty acid oxidation. So sluggish digestion could increase estrogen and estrogen and serotonin and radiation could increase estrogen and serotonin. The bowel is one of the ways to get rid of unneeded estrogen by way of the liver excreting it and if your bowel is sluggish you reabsorb it and if your bowel is irritated and sluggish it secretes much more serotonin than needed which affects your whole hormonal system bringing up the stress hormones and contributing to lower temperature. So eating carrots with vinegar or lemon juice or just carrots and taking liver herbs like cascara and dandelion root milk thistle can help with sluggish bowels. Yeah and just eating what you consider to be the most delicious food can greatly help [17:03] the intestine secrete more juices so things digest faster and move along more smoothly. So enjoy your food. Hopefully we can enjoy our food and hopefully it's not enjoying Puffa's which is fried whatever. As long as it's not fried in coconut oil then it's bad for you. Okay so let's get back to where we were at the beginning in terms of people mentioning that they can't help but gain a bit of extra mid-weight and I think what we're coming around to is that exercise and muscle building however small or however gentle however gradual is one of the most important things when adopting a typical diet that would certainly replace all the nutrition that a person needs I know your diet does that. So in terms of gentle muscle building how do you advocate that to happen say in a sedentary [18:06] 60 year old lady perhaps. Just doing an occasional knee bend squatting and standing up again and maybe getting some five pound dumbbells and lifting those in different motions just a few lifts two or three times a day and when you're doing that maybe squat once or twice. Right because it really is about being actively involved in generating muscle however gently or however likely the weight or the exercise would involve. Okay because you're saying essentially that muscle in its own right effectively burns glucose and the very presence of muscle with the increase in testosterone testosterone rather will actually improve the metabolic rate yeah okay. Now another direction and you've mentioned in I don't know you mentioned this earlier [19:11] on that you said and this is for the guys I think preferentially because they probably have more of a chance to see this but you mentioned foaming urine as being an indicator of an excess excretion of steroid hormone precursors and being a sign of stress. Well yeah in the morning you have generally been exposed to several hours of darkness and darkness is very stressful just staying indoors too much gives you chronic stress from the absence of light but everyone in the morning is at their peak of being exposed to stress hormones from the darkness and during stress like starvation the hormones first [20:12] try to mobilize energy production and that during the night involves increased free fatty acids sort of like doing a little marathon during the night as far as the shift to fatty acids goes and your liver if it's well nourished and supplied with thyroid hormones will process steroids such as estrogen and cortisol which reach it the liver will attach either sulfate or a sugar glucuronic acid to make it water soluble so that then it can leave in the blood stream to the kidneys excreted and in that attached to the either the sulfate or the sugar it is like a soap it is oily at one end and water soluble at the other and so it makes [21:14] foam and during the night the fatty acids can be processed in the same way and the liver especially recognizes the unsaturated fatty acids but whatever arrives during the night is likely to contribute to that morning foam okay so I know you mentioned the liver's ability in storing glucose for the nighttime diet fast if you like for the eight hours that we don't eat so given given that a person's consuming adequate sugars during the daytime to stock their liver for the nighttime fast or given that the person would as we recommend and I know that you've been a been an advocate and suggestion of this that they're eating a small amount of ice cream at nighttime before bed or they're taking a glass of orange juice to bed with them to sip on whenever they wake up to take get a little bit of sugar so that their adrenaline is kept down and their nighttime stress response doesn't occur do you [22:19] think that is that still possible for somebody to have a foam foaming more at morning urine in the in the presence of sugars during the nighttime um yeah the um stress always occurs but if you're sleeping soundly and deeply there is less intense damage from the stress so if you stayed awake in the dark you would probably have a super foamy urine in the morning okay and this is something else uh perhaps during the daytime if some of some of the guys notice what's happening with them during the day this again would be another indicator of insufficient sugars to block adrenaline and other stress hormones and that their system was reasonably stressed yeah I think so yeah okay and what about for females I've seen things this is not as obvious it's not how am I saying it because of how obvious it is okay so um yeah okay so going on to um [23:22] going on to the the shift the shift in uh fat uh content or fat makeup that you advocate from or the recommendations that our listeners have heard over the last few years in terms of increased saturated fats uh switching to butter coconut palm oil excluding all the liquid oils as sources of poofa um excuse me I know you've mentioned in the past that the the the need to avoid poofa is pretty paramount if you really want to make a change in your physiology but I think you've also said that it's it's very difficult to avoid it totally because you're naturally going to produce some um well uh the natural foods milk beef lamb coconut oil and so on these all have two or three percent unsaturated polyunsaturated fats and if you eat just a tiny [24:24] bit more than you're going to burn right away some of it gets stored in your fat tissue and what is stored is preferentially polyunsaturated fats your body recognizes that the good stuff to burn right away is the saturated fat right after the sugars and so it selectively doesn't burn the polyunsaturated fat quickly and and so it's the most likely to be stored but then your fat is the same way fat cells prefer to burn saturated fat and so whatever you've stored in your fat by eating more than you needed uh over time your fat cells use up the percentage of the stored saturated fat and increase the percentage of the stored polyunsaturated fat so that as you get older and fatter [25:25] or even if you don't get fatter as you get older your fat tissue becomes more polyunsaturated so that each time you get hungry or stressed and draw on your fat stores for energy it is more anti thyroid and more pro estrogenic because of its increasing uh polyunsaturation with with time so with a common recommendation of this is a common recommendation i make is include three tablespoons of coconut oil in your diet a day but of course if we were talking about someone who only burns 700 calories a day would you still make that same recommendation to do three tablespoons of more like a small teaspoon three times right so i think basically what we our listeners and we have to keep in mind is that everybody's metabolism is at a different rate and if someone's eating a 1200 calorie a day diet and it's like perfect and they say i can hardly anything well that's probably because they're only burning 700 and they're they [26:29] just keep gaining weight on 1200 okay all right so um is there any way then perhaps for those people who probably uh we're talking about right now to be able to assess their metabolic rate given that that is what is driving how well they do or don't lose weight um one way is just to look everything up in a food analysis chart and measure the amount of calories you're eating every day but another way is to uh calculate or take a note of the fluid that you drink milk juice coffee total volume of fluid intake in a day and measure the total volume of urine output in the same period of time and the difference is what's evaporated okay and in an average level of [27:30] activity and average relative humidity a person will generally evaporate a liter per thousand calories burned so if you have only a missing liter of fluid in the day you know you're only burning a thousand calories so if someone gets a half a gallon of fluid a day and they only pee out say a couple cups then you know that they're very 1500 their system is very very low thyroid well yeah i mean no sorry very very high thyroid what a pint out of two liters that's a 1500 calorie burning so that's not very much either right but if somebody drinks a half a gallon and they practically pee you know a part and a half that's a very bad bad ratio yeah and a half a gallon that would be about two liters yeah yeah there's four liters to a gallon i just thought [28:35] we might want to remind listeners that it is 7 30 and the phone lines are open if people want to call in and have any questions about the subject tonight yeah or if any other subject that they're interested in relating to the yeah okay all right thank you jordan okay so excuse me i know you um you you also are very keen that um females and males do everything they can to limit their exposure to estrogen for all its negative effects um estrogen dominant females this is something else that you you've bought out uh that it's not you don't always take it for granted that estrogen dominated dominant females would be overweight uh with those what we typically imagine is estrogen tendencies but actually you could get a slender slender woman based on the same the same conditions with estrogen in in the animal studies they've seen that estrogen [29:36] excites some of the metabolic processes while flowing others down and it can make the animals hyperactive but very slender and in people if there are cases where it can do that same thing it can make a woman tense very hyper active and and oversensitive and very skinny but it can do the other it can turn on the stress metabolism while it slows the metabolism lowering the body temperature for example okay and uh that can lead to excess fat storage and that's the same in men as well excess estrogen can make some men very thin and excess estrogen can make some men overweight so is there any any surefire way of um differentiating differentiating the one condition in the two separate [30:40] uh physical pictures no nothing but i'm person do you do you do you know what the uh the the biological preference is for driving driving it in one or the other direction um no okay all right i had i had to ask but i'm sure i'm i'm sure there's something more that you'll bring out in a bit we've got two quarters on the line dr p so let's uh take the first of the two quarters you're on the air this uh this is david hello hi david where are you calling from tonight david yeah i think that's the other thing i want to make uh bring everyone's attention let's let's find out where everyone is from i am from missouri missouri and um i i've actually talked to sarah a few times and emailed and and emailed dr p and i really appreciate this show by the way i've listened to these podcasts i've uh downloaded every podcast that you've done [31:43] you're very welcome and that's what i listened to and i drive and i just great sometimes i've listened to several of these over several times and there's a lot in there you think so well oh yeah i know it's just amazing how it seems like each week that goes by i just understand this more and more at a deeper level and i just i love it no iPods are useful then absolutely and we're very grateful for dr p i've got kind of two different sets of questions that still pertain to everything you talked about tonight one is i have a fairly weak left knee and so i've been kind of experimenting with using a rebounder i've got two different types of more soft one and then a one that's a little bit firmer and i kind of go back and forth between the two i do very light you know just bouncing and then uh also running in place or jogging and i usually try to do that you know like three to five minutes and i do that several times to the day if i'm at home working um i'm just curious what you think of that [32:47] talk speed um i don't know if there's um much much benefit to the bouncing uh it does strengthen your bones i guess the the compression and concussion but um something that builds more massive muscles uh stress even though it isn't uh fatiguing uh just uh resistance training in little bursts i think would help to raise your endrogens and strengthen the connective tissues and that was one of the questions i was going to ask you dr so just using like different weights and not doing too much stress but trying to uh do a certain amount of repetitions where you're just strengthening the muscles that is a good thing to do i'm yeah make the muscle know that it's been active uh warm it up a little but not enough to make you get out of breath or anything and then what do you feel about just doing basic yoga you know like doing uh different postures [33:51] and holding those postures where you're actually holding the muscles and it's you know semi-stressed state but then relaxing it um yeah that kind of stress is good for the muscles okay uh and then the other thing i wanted to ask you about you know i've i've uh i've been using the 250 watt bulbs that you had recommended and i've got three of those and i use those in different places around the house uh because i'm a photographer i have white stands that make it kind of easy to move them around but um i'm curious you know because you're you've talked about the stress of darkness before you you know after the sun goes down and as you go into the evening before you go to bed do you think it's useful to use those right before going to bed like say for 15 minutes to half hour and then maybe when you arrive in the morning maybe doing it for a half hour like while you're drinking your coffee or what do you think about i think so and i'm basing that on some studies that were done on uh plant tissues about 30 or 40 years ago they [34:54] they found that uh any kind of tissue put in sunlight or ultraviolet light uh got some excited free radicals or excited electrons and shining red light on those would uh just immediately quints those that had been excited but um in if you keep living tissue in the dark it starts building up more of those excited electrons over a period of oh 30 minutes or so you can see an increase in them wow that's right okay and then just one last question is dreaming a sign that you're having a certain degree of stress through the night rather than being in a deep sleep where you're not remembering your dreams when you wake up in the morning and when you wake up in the middle of the night yeah the the metabolism has these cycles uh the 24 hour cycle is the basic [35:58] thing but it is subdivided into roughly 90 minute cycles of ups and downs uh where the blood sugar and the adrenaline and everything is mobilized a little bit and uh if your liver is running short on fuel uh the cycles become more intense and the dream cycles uh go with uh drops in the blood sugar and surges of of the nerve chemicals such as adrenaline uh okay and so if you were having a really great dream that was exhilarating and you felt really good about when you woke up would that still be the case because it's actually causing you to awaken um yeah except that's probably uh that your whole system recognizes that it has been rested and it's time to get up and eat something and that's often why that's often why you have dreams in the um early hours [37:03] in the morning because that's when you run out of sugar at that point but yeah that that makes sense i'll be darned okay what were you going to say dr p if your body is well rested from six or eight hours of sleep then the dreams are likely to have a very pleasant all of the getting you ready to go out and do something yeah it's preparing you to wake up yeah as opposed to that's pretty cool as opposed to the nightmares yeah as opposed to the 1 a.m nightmares right exactly so that means that your body is really stressed out and it's yeah yeah not getting what it needs all right well thank you so much for your call hey thank you okay we've got two more callers so let's take the next caller hi and where are you from yeah i have a calling from piercy okay just down the road okay yeah um i turn the radio on just in the midst of uh the subject about urinating and taking in fluid um what my question is if you take in a half gallon of fluid [38:09] a day and you um pee out most of that is that healthy or is that unhealthy it shows that you're not evaporating very much so in an extremely humid climate that wouldn't be so bad but in a if you're indoors and have a relative humidity of about 50 then it means that your metabolism is slow and not producing much heat i see okay so you want a certain amount of evaporation when the atmosphere is in fact dry um yeah very healthy like 12 to 15 year old people burn fuel very wastefully but that's when people are the least likely to die is when they're wasting fuel like crazy so basically we need to at least likely to what to die to die yeah [39:14] around 12 to 15 people are the are the healthiest and oh i see you know resistant to stress so dr pee it's not based on your wasting fuel though is it yeah it looks like a waste to eat thousands of calories a day when you're not doing anything but it's good for you i see i see so a fast metabolism is that what you're saying is a healthy metabolism yeah the wasteful energy metabolism gotcha and so just to answer another question um caller if you burn or evaporate half of what you drink so you pee out the other half that's pretty much normal in our climate wouldn't you agree dr pee if you drink maybe three quarts of liquid and you pee out a quart and a half yeah okay good in this in this i think that would be about an average norm right because we we don't have that high humidity like they do in the south [40:20] okay good so you say that we don't have the high oh okay gotcha gotcha especially during the summertime obviously right even drier yes all right we're good thank you all right thank you thank you for your call all right let's take the next call hello you're on there hello dr peake mm-hmm uh i'm reading oh this is a fascinating show thank you so much where are you from caller i'm southern humble okay um i'm reading that one side effect of anti anxiety and antidepressant drugs is weight gain do you know how this works or do you know how these drugs work at all um if they increase your exposure to serotonin or decrease your adrenaline they'll slow your metabolic rate and uh they could harder to burn calories [41:20] yeah that's interesting okay thank you so much and and you know just the just how you know i'm reading also that they don't uh really there's no conclusive studies as to relating a low serotonin level with any mental state so anyway um yeah they're not even sure how those um ssri's work anyways now they're saying that it really doesn't have much to do with serotonin yeah and they don't have a very good way of describing the topography of the receptors and all of that kind of stuff so if you act you can elucidate any on that i would appreciate and i'll just uh i'll just hang up now and listen thanks thank you for your call so dr peake i guess the last question was how are these antidepressants making people feel better if it's not if they are [42:21] if it's it has nothing to do with serotonin increasing or decreasing or anything at all with serotonin oh they all work in slightly different ways so you have to think about each one individually maybe we should do that special time to go over some of those specific chemicals okay that sounds great okay but thanks uh thanks thanks for the the callers that have been okay so the lines are open uh from now until eight o'clock if you live in the area numbers one eight hundred km ud rad if you live outside the area uh the numbers nine two uh beg your pardon if you live outside the area numbers one eight hundred km ud rad if you're in the area it's nine two three three nine one one okay so um dr peake just carrying on carrying on with the topic of the ideal the ideal diet that i know you've suggested before which i know sarah's uh deals with quite a lot of people [43:24] with this and you're mentioning the uh quart of oj well do you want to do you want to mention the what you would normally be recommending well i mean if you were if dr peake would recommend something like a quart of orange juice a quart of milk a day and you wanted to lose weight i mean you wouldn't have much room for anything else if you only burn 700 calories a day well if you use one percent butterfat milk that's only 400 calories per quart where whole milk would be almost twice that much yeah and one of the tricks of orange juice is that there are some good chemicals in it which are uh anti-astrogenic uh and some other fruits uh tropical fruits are some some of the anti-astrogens are are very important uh for the metabolism [44:28] as well as the uh minerals and uh type of sugar and such so there's there's compounds you're saying in oj even um yeah they're anti-astrogenic yeah and with milk it isn't just the protein but the calcium right it's very important as an anti-inflammatory uh anti stress anti-depressant and so on people who eat the same number of calories without milk are much more likely to be fat than the people who are regular milk drinkers okay i know why don't you tell us about your experience when you were in fennelind i think it was fennelind and russia well in russia and the slavic countries in general i found that there was really no reliably good milk in the cities [45:30] uh and the people all had bad teeth and were fat and food was very cheap but milk was scarce and probably proteins in general weren't as cheap as as the average food but crossing over the border into fennelind it was very impressive to uh see how many stores uh had displays of cheese in the window and the people were all healthy looking on slender compared to the other side of the border well we noticed the same thing in france you go to france and they everywhere they all eat cheese and they're most for the most part they're all very slender so i guess what you're saying is that 400 calories from orange juice is not comparative to 400 calories from baked potatoes and rice definitely not yeah it stimulates your metabolism and suppresses the stress hormones [46:35] whereas 400 calories from baked potato and rice would increase your stress hormones and suppress your metabolism yeah and then there's the matter of the the starch particles that if you don't have some saturated fat with them the starch particles can set up a whole pattern of stress and injury by entering your bloodstream which people taking supplements should be very careful to avoid anything with particles such as titanium dioxide or silica those are very allergenic particles that are in all supplements practically yeah and those things getting into the bloodstream trigger the stress hormones and obesity is the least of the things they contribute to okay we've got uh we've got a few more callers on the line dr pizza let's take this first caller you're on the air and where you're from hello hello you're on the air and where you're from hi i've been trying to lose some weight [47:38] and uh i've been weighing myself uh periodically and at night time as well in the morning and it seems to me that i'm i lose about five pounds of weight sleeping uh i've some some nights i've noticed i've urinated sometimes i haven't urinated it seems always about the same about five pounds and i'm wondering where this five pounds goes if it's with heat and if there's a relationship between us being cold at night and warm at night whether you lose more weight in uh cooler climates than you would in warmer even though warmer climate people seem to be thinner than cooler climate people it depends on how you respond to the cold uh some people uh steam up the windows of the bedroom so the window runs water down and [48:39] collects at the bottom of the windowsill in the morning those are people who lose a lot of weight by evaporation during the night uh you can see the water collecting on the cool surfaces and then people in warmer climates are warmer so their metabolism stay up during the night and they probably are thinner because of that right dr beat yeah um when your body temperature drops in the night because you're flowing it down to resist the stress but if you reach a certain temperature you turn on the inflammatory stress producing hormones and so uh you get not only the darkness but the cold cold extremities hot thing stress so it's better to be comfortable if you're actually trying to shed weight is better to be comfortable at night correct yeah okay so that's reaching reaching the low temperatures you mean uh dr [49:41] yeah if your if your feet reach 90 degrees Fahrenheit they're producing toxic stress inducing substances so don't run around barefoot with cold feet we're always telling our nieces that always make sure they get the socks on i know my grandma's always that's incredible and advocate for keeping your feet warm when you get out of bed don't cold head yeah well cold head and cold feet not good and uh some people taking a warm foot bath at bedtime and then putting on warm socks and a wool cap sleep a lot better yeah there you go okay we have two more callers so thanks thanks for your caller caller it's a lot hi next caller you're on the earth i'm here hello hello i'm here hi where where are you calling from oh is that me yes it's you where are you calling i'm calling from uh philip'sville philip'sville okay that's uh 15 miles out the road okay go ahead well there's a couple of questions i had um [50:47] one i'm curious in the beginning you said something about eating food that tastes delicious to you was good for you but you didn't say what foods those were it varies with the person but you should try to avoid the things that affect your metabolism harmfully like starches and polyunsaturated fats or and uh some some plant materials are toxic but otherwise just what good to eat whole grains like brown rice and millet and no there's almost nothing of value in those even if it's if it's not processed i'm i don't mean like white rice uh well the white rice is uh relatively free of irritants and toxins but it has very little of food value in that so i thought brown rice had a lot of vitamins and fiber and things that were good for you not compared to like say orange juice okay now when it comes to oh how about ice cream uh you know [51:52] a good ice cream that doesn't have chemicals in it like hog and dogs or something that's good for you or not i mean it's got high calories well yeah i mean if you're trying to lose weight then i wouldn't recommend you eat ice cream but if you're uh you're not trying to lose weight you're happy with your weight and you're having trouble sleeping it can help a lot of people go to sleep milk milk and sugar is a bad food combination uh i heard that no i wouldn't agree with that at all if you had like um some cheese or a small glass of milk or something that there's something in that that helps you sleep um yeah milk contains a good balance all in itself because it has some some fat some protein and some sugar well i don't think milk but i do cook half and half in my coffee in the morning does that count i didn't hear that i said i i don't usually drink milk by itself but i put half and half in my coffee in the morning does that count well no that's mostly cream well and that's not good i mean it's half cream half milk well it's okay if it [52:54] goes with other food such as protein and sugars but uh now um you mentioned orange juice a lot but what are the other fruit juices um i tend to really enjoy other fruit juices like berry juice and peach juice and carrot juice and cherry juice and all kinds of different juices um you know that don't have sugar in them and i tend to drink them like half diluted with water so they're not so strong but i've had people tell me that um it's not good for me because it has too much sugar in it and to make calories so what do you think about juices other than orange juice or uh many juices are are good it's the minerals and um antioxidants as well as the sugar that are important but uh grapefruit juice for example has a chemical that causes your liver to increase estrogen in the body oh no i don't mean grapefruit juice i'm thinking of um [53:59] you know i can't forgot juice peach juice berry juice grape juice those kinds grape juice is very good as long as you consider the calories it has more concentrated calories than orange juice um some tropical fruits are very good guava for example uh-huh mango uh carrot juice is another one that should be avoided except in small amounts because of the high carotene content it's very metabolically suppressive oh it is it's antagonizes both thyroid and progesterone what's good for for thyroid uh you know what's good for like stimulating your metabolism so that you you know you burn calories quicker but you know you won't have an overactive thyroid um milk cheese and uh some of the fruit juices are the best things right so 400 calories from uh fruit juice isn't going to be the same as eating 400 calories of brown rice the 400 calories of brown rice is going to be much more metabolically suppressive than the 400 calories [55:03] from fruit juice very yeah i'm i'm thank you for your call but it is it is a couple of minutes to the top of the hour and i want to make sure that the listeners who are tuning get to know dr. rames pete's contact details so unfortunately we've come to the end of this show dr. pete thanks so much for your input and your uh your wisdom and i'm sorry we couldn't get to you at a callers i'm sorry they had two more callers on the line but i'm afraid we couldn't we couldn't get to you join us next month march 15th so uh those people that have listened to us uh and dr. Raymond pete most especially uh his contact details are www.repeat.com uh full of uh what we would call scientific articles folks so not just hearsay not just things that he's come up with but a lot of his articles are fully referenced so there's plenty of science behind it and that's r-a-y-p-e-a-t dot com okay so lots of articles there for people to read and even the subject we've mentioned this evening there's plenty of information there so thanks again for all the callers and uh we can [56:09] also be reached toll-free uh monday through friday at 1-888-WBM-URB so uh until third friday of next month which is march 15th yeah we uh we look forward to speaking with dr. pete again and with those people who've tuned in thanks so much for your time
