---
source:
  series: Eluv
  title: Effects of Stress and Trauma, Part Two
  kind: audio
  url: https://raypeatforum.com/community/attachments/effects-of-stress-and-trauma-part-2-new-2014-mp3.691
  mirrors:
    - https://raypeatforum.com/community/threads/eluv-interview-effects-of-stress-and-trauma-part-2-new.4657
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-30"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-30"
completion:
  content: true
---
 [0:00] It's amazing. You mentioned a herbal antihistamine earlier. What was that again? That was scopolamine and that is sometimes available if a person is nauseated after surgery. That's a very safe anti-nausea drug which does several things that helps to hold up the body temperature besides stopping the nausea. And can it be used with anesthetics? It was part of the anesthesia that was pioneered by George Kryl and it's still occasionally in use but since it's a generic herbal chemical the drug companies aren't very keen on having it promoted but it is available both as part of the anesthetic and part of the recovery program. [1:01] And what can people do as far as specific diet for post-surgery recovery to help their brain and their body recover? The same foods that are generally good but emphasizing the things that are lost specifically by high stress which are protein, zinc, some of the B vitamins are turned over very fast in stress. So foods like liver and oysters and eggs which are rich in the trace minerals and protein as long as you're getting adequate carbohydrate and calcium these happen to be high phosphate foods along with the protein but they have the highest concentration of the healing minerals and vitamins. You're listening to WMNF, Tampa 88.5 on your dial and we're speaking with Dr. Ray Pete and we spoke a little bit earlier about cheeses and I wanted to ask you a question relating to pasteurization. [2:16] You mentioned that there's beneficial nutrients. Does this get discounted once the milks or cheeses are pasteurized? No, it's such a tiny amount. They pasteurize it now in I think it's something like three seconds at a high temperature and then it drops immediately. So there's very little oxidative damage done now by pasteurizing. So it's a quick flash pasteurization? Yeah. Beautiful. It might lower the vitamin A content three or four percent something like that but since it's such a good rich source of all these nutrients no one is going to suffer deficiency if they're eating pasteurized milk and cheese. And what's your feeling about exercise during that recovery time for people that have gone through surgery? [3:23] I think better just to regain flexibility and mobility in a gentle way not to worry about muscle building exercise. The time to think about that is before surgery because in one study of old people they found that the better their long range survival was in the six months following the surgery the death rate was much higher in the lean low body mass people. And the survival went up directly in proportion to the body mass. And in aging or stress the muscles are frontum and it isn't just the fat that is a buffer against stress but it's mainly the mass of the muscles. [4:29] And exercises such as deep knee bends, mild weightlifting with dumbbells, just a few minutes a day of mild resistance exercise events can keep your muscles sound and relatively massive. And muscles are themselves a hormone source. They can produce testosterone instead of cortisol when you're doing these resistant exercises so the muscle building is protecting your heart and brain as well as building up the reserves of tissue that are part of your resistance against stress. You mentioned that the cortisol damages the brain once the trauma has happened. Is that reversible over time if someone is following a protocol that would support their greater health? [5:38] Yeah, it's probably just the same as the following anorexia that they've seen that young women can have a great and quick regrowth of the mass of the brain substance just by stopping the stress and starting to equal. And I think that would happen with old people who are partially demanded by the stress of very serious surgery. And lastly I wanted to chat a little bit about adrenals. As many, many people these days seem to be suffering from low adrenals or adrenal fatigue. I mentioned that the muscles are an important source of steroid synthesis. Our biggest endocrine gland is our brain and the brain stabilizes all of the organs. [6:45] And if your brain is experiencing stress that shifts the adrenal function to cortisol rather than DHEA and progesterone and the androgens. And the adrenals shouldn't produce simply the stress-promoting hormones. They should be putting out some of the defensive protective progesterone, DHEA, and prognitalone as well. But when your brain gives them these super stress signals then they will overact. And at Hanseli defined the adrenal failure as when the adrenal gland begins bleeding and the cells die that make steroids. [7:52] But the adrenal cortex is extremely able to regenerate as fast as the thymus and thyroid gland. The cortex of the adrenal if you're well fed and if you stop the stress signals it can regenerate. So what Hanseli was talking about was an acute stress causes immediate bleeding of your stomach and intestines. And that's because of the high cortisol production among other stress hormones. And if you continue that too long without feeding some of the curative nutrients, sugars, zinc, magnesium, calcium, and so on, vitamin D, then the adrenal glands can't keep up the intense work and they start bleeding and the tissue dies. [8:58] Too much estrogen is one of the things that can contribute to overacting of the adrenal cortex. In animal experiments we saw that just injecting a big dose of estrogen would cause adrenal enlargement in a moderate case or bleeding and death in an extreme dose of estrogen. Absolutely amazing how everything is so connected and reactive of what we're doing both with our diet and our exercise and our lifestyle choices. I should mention that cholesterol and thyroid and vitamin A are the important things for keeping the adrenal cortex from getting stressed to death because the cortisol or the cholesterol is the raw material for making cortisol and the other stress adaptive hormones. [10:06] And without enough cholesterol and thyroid and vitamin A these cells are simulated but can't work and so they just give up endotropy. What sources of cholesterol would you recommend? A good diet, plenty of fruit and milk in the diet will allow your tissues, especially the liver and brain, to make as much cortisol as they need. And speaking of liver, would you recommend for people to eat liver, if they do eat meat, to eat liver or heart or kidneys from grass-fed beef for example? Is that a helpful thing to... Yeah, the liver, except for the ratio of calcium to phosphate, the liver has the highest concentration of the anti-stress nutrients. [11:12] And so at least twice a month there should be a good meal of liver for stress-resistant, maybe once a week, four ounces a week is a safe and effective amount. Good old liver and onions eh? Dr. Ray Pete, thank you so, so much for joining us tonight on The Ultra Sounds Show. It is always such a delight to have you on and we very, very much appreciate your time and fountain of information. If people would like to get in touch with you and find out more about your own services, where do they go? Well, my website is repeat.com. And you also have a YouTube page, correct? I don't know. You are up on YouTube and people can listen to some of your interviews. [12:14] And I have on my website, radianceall.com, one of our past interviews where we spoke about good fats and coconut oil. And that was very informative and we had many, many people commenting and writing back about that. So thank you so, so much. Okay, thank you. Many, many blessings, much love sweetheart, thank you. Bye. And we've been speaking with Dr. Ray Pete and if you are just tuned in halfway through, you can always listen to this show again for the next six or seven days until it gets replaced and you can go to womf.org. And on there is a schedule with a drop down menu and you would look for ultrasounds, click on that. It's Thursday, 11 till one. And then on that web page, you will see a listen now button and you can listen again or download it. And you can also share the link if you have loved ones that may be interested in the conversation that we had tonight with Ray Pete. [13:22] I'm going to play some music and finish up the show with some beautiful vibrations, sending you much, much love, many, many blessings. Thank you. Thank you. [14:52] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [16:22] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [17:52] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [19:22] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [20:32] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [21:42] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [22:52] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [24:12] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [25:22] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [26:32] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [27:42] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [28:50] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [30:00] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [31:10] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [32:18] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [33:46] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [35:12] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [36:24] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [37:50] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [39:16] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [40:40] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [42:06] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [43:20] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [44:44] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [46:06] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [47:34] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [48:58] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [50:24] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [51:48] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [53:10] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [54:36] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [55:58] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [57:24] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [58:50] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.