---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: "Diabetes I: Diabetes, Fats, Sugars, Starch Damage"
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwXarjDWN-g
  # also https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-140221-diabetes.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwXarjDWN-g
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-23"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-23"
---
 [0:00] Okay, until we get Dr. Peat back on the line here, basically the continuation of this show is going to be on diabetes and Dr. Peat's research on to neuropathies and the classical diagnosis of diabetes and what we know in the light of current research to kind of make the notion of diabetes disappear in light of new findings. So Dr. Peat, if you're with us. Hello. Hi Dr. Peat, can you hear us okay? Yes. Okay, so as always, even though you're a pretty permanent fixture on the show and we're very happy to keep it that way, for those perhaps have never listened to you or heard you, would you just give an outline of your academic professional background so people know more about you? Okay, I had been interested in biology for a long time but was doing other things, teaching English, linguistics and such, but in 1968 I decided to go back to graduate school to get [1:06] a PhD at the University of Oregon. Graduated there in 72 having specialized in mostly physiology of reproduction biochemistry. And since then I've been following up on the same subjects related to oxidative metabolism progesterone estrogen and thyroid. Okay, and I think also just for the people that are listening to the show. Dr. Peat, you've been pretty much altruistic in your attitude towards helping people. I know lots of people have consulted with you from all over the world for various metabolic disorders. You have a very alternative view but in terms of the research, it's actually not that alternative, it's just that the research doesn't really surface anywhere near as quickly as we'd like it to compared to what medicine and doctors are taught in terms of the cause of diseases, [2:10] specifically metabolic disorders and their treatment is often lagging behind or in fact contrary indicated in some ways. So you've got a very extensive treatment background too, haven't you? A big part of the problem is that medical journals are totally separate from science journals. Years ago when, before the internet, IndexMedicas was a list of medical journal articles similar to PubMed now and I occasionally compared things that I would find in biological abstracts or chemical abstracts and when I would look things up later in IndexMedicas, I found that there was usually a delay of 20 or 30 years after the discovery of something absolutely essential such as the role of coenzyme Q10 in metabolism. [3:15] Okay, well on to this month's topic, I know you've recently produced a newsletter, you haven't actually finished it yet but the subject of the newsletter is going to be on diabetes and fats and it has an interwoven component with all those protective elements of things that you are advocating fairly continuously for many different disorders but diabetes being one of those with things like progesterone and thyroid and adequate sugars. Can I just start off perhaps by just saying for our listeners perhaps before we get into the actual causes of diabetes, would you just then outline the standard definition and cause of diabetes from the perspective of current medical understanding before we get into the research and what it is you understand it as? Medical understanding has changed very little in the last 200 years. It was called the sugar disease and in ancient times it was named because of the excess urination [4:20] and the urine contained a lot of glucose and people craved sugar and they discovered the blood was loaded with glucose and so it began the medical concept that it was the glucose or the sugar disease and the standard cure was to make them unable to eat sugar, imprison them as necessary and they would just die anyway but they kept them from satisfying their sugar under and then insulin was discovered which would for the people who were wasting away with what later was called type 1 diabetes, insulin would allow them to build muscle and put on fat instead of breaking tissues down and excreting it into urine. [5:26] But the sugar disease concept stayed with the medical profession even though insulin deficiency came to be the idea of its cause but then as they looked for more ways to sell insulin they noticed that lots of people who weren't wasting away and dying at a young age also had very high blood sugar, some of them had sugar in their urine yet when they tested their blood they found it had a normal amount of insulin in it but anyway they were good candidates for treatment so it came to be called type 2 diabetes even though the original concept was that diabetes was a wasting disease in which you quickly died of tissue wasting but now that fat [6:28] people became something like 95%!o(MISSING)f the patients for treatment of their high blood glucose so it definitely isn't a problem of insulin deficiency for the great majority of people who are diagnosed with diabetes. OK so you just mentioned what's currently being called type 1 and type 2, type 1 is the insulin for one of the better explanations, type 1 is insulin dependent diabetes, and then type 2 is non-insulin dependent so it's kind of a diet, what they call diet controlled or it can be modulated by the diet. So how does the model of diabetes then, the current medical model of diabetes differ from the research perspective on the cause of diabetes before we get into articles and specifics? In the late 19th century two doctors doubted the theory that it was from eating too much sugar [7:39] because they died even faster when they made them not eat any sugar so they began feeding first one patient with each doctor, they let them eat all the sugar they wanted which was something like three quarters of a pound a day of pure sugar added and they very quickly recovered from the wasting disease and were able to go back to work after a few weeks of this super high sugar diet and that gradually their followers eventually saw that fructose was part of the sucrose standard sugar molecule which got into cells and was metabolized without needing insulin so for 50 or 60 years many diabetics were able to use a normal amount of sweetener in the form of fructose [8:45] but that never became the dominant treatment for diabetes even though it is more or less as effective as the simply very high sucrose diet but experiments looking for what was the cause of in the case of young kids that type 1 diabetes that was more common in girls than boys it turned out to be sort of an autoimmune problem, inflammation killing off the beta cells and as it happens that in vitro and in animal experiments you can stimulate the growth of stem cells in the pancreas with glucose so it isn't glucose that's responsible for killing those cells it's an inflammation reaction and the inflammation causes breakdown of fatty acids [9:52] which cause pre-radical injury to the tissue and because of that observation of the inflammation involving prostaglandins and fatty acids unsaturated fatty acids a few experimenters put lab animals on a totally fat free diet giving them only saturated fats or no fat at all just carbohydrates and protein vitamins and minerals and then tried to give them diabetes by all of the standard methods of poisoning the beta cells of the pancreas in various ways so they couldn't make insulin and these fat free animals didn't develop the experimental diabetes the way all other animals do so experimentally it's been pretty well demonstrated that unsaturated fatty acids breaking down [10:58] produce inflammation which activate many of the processes seen in diabetes the generative processes in the retina and nerves for example or where the damage starts very often before the blood sugar increases at all so if you're getting retinal degeneration and have normal blood sugar or if you're getting numb and tingly hands and feet and have normal blood sugar it's clearly not the sugar which is responsible for the degenerative changes. Okay so again you're pointing the finger of blame if you like at the free fatty acid liberation and the oxidated damage that occurs from that. Yeah and the unsaturated fatty acids happen to create a vicious circle because they create stress [12:02] and the stress activates the stress hormones which provide in the normal process of providing fat from the tissues as emergency fuel they liberate more of the unstable polyunsaturated fats creating more free radical damage creating more stress liberating more fats and so on or purely saturated fats when liberated tend to turn off the stress hormones. Okay so another good reason yet again to avoid the liquid oils and avoid the free fatty the fish oils and all the other oils that basically are very unsaturated because they're unstable promote oxidation and all the stress response and tissue damage they're in. Yep. Okay so how okay let's talk perhaps I just wanted to mention that one of these drugs are medications that I know quite a few people have been on and are probably still using [13:08] amongst others but metformin as a diabetes medication. You know Finformin was the first form of that that was used widely in the 50s and 60s but it was killing a very high proportion of people they were dying much earlier than they would have with no treatment at all. Oh my goodness. And it was causing lactic acidosis by causing the mitochondria to be unable to oxidize glucose which was exactly the problem of diabetes. So that got a bad reputation and it was replaced by metformin which was included to not cause lactic acidosis but even on PubMed if you look up metformin and lactic acid you'll see I don't know it must be more than a hundred articles on the warning about the production [14:13] of lactic acidosis with this standard very common treatment. And it works where it works partly by poisoning the mitochondria so that the cells are forced to produce lactic acid and so it lowers blood sugar by wasting the glucose turning into lactic acid. Wow. It also has some other effects which account for why everyone doesn't die quickly of lactic acidosis. It apparently has some slightly protective anti-inflammatory effects. Wow. OK. You're listening to Ask Europe Doctor on K and UD Galvov 91.1 FM. I'm from 7.30 to the end of the show at 8 o'clock. You're invited to call in with any questions with our permanent speaker Dr. Ray Peat who's on the show discussing diabetes, the scientific approach and the research approach that's elucidating [15:20] lots of different treatment strategies than you would otherwise expect to hear from your doctor. So the number here for living in the area is 9233911 or if you're outside the area there are toll-free numbers, 1-800-K-M-U-D-RAD so any time from 7.30 to 8 o'clock. OK. So I wanted to also let you get into the benefits of sugar. I know we've done several radio shows on how good and how beneficial sugar is for the organism and it's the same with salt and keep getting validated slowly but surely with reports of that same thing in the press whereas before it was pretty well maligned so we understand that there are a lot of protective effects that sugar confers to the organism from a cellular energy standpoint. What other beneficial effects does sugar have when you look at it from a diabetic perspective? I looked up what current journals and doctors are saying are the mechanisms that cause nerve [16:27] damage in diabetes and they have a standard four or five chemical or functional changes of nerve cells that they say are caused by excess glucose. They occur in the presence of excess glucose in the diabetic but they also occur before or without the presence of glucose and the deficiency of glucose is one of the things that can induce the same defensive reactions that are blamed on sugar. So you have to look at the evidence regarding the deficiency of glucose and compare it experiment by experiment with the kind of evidence they propose to explain glucose as the cause and [17:30] when you look at all of the events associated with diabetes and the symptoms you see that hormone changes typically go with it. Stress induces aromatase that increases estrogen production and also directly increases some of the pituitary hormones besides ACTH that drives the adrenals. Stress increases growth hormone which provides fuel in an emergency by increasing free fatty acids in circulation and the increased estrogen also increases the ACTH and prolactin, several of the stress hormones in the pituitary but especially growth hormone is very closely [18:31] connected with estrogen so females have higher not only estrogen but growth hormone and free fatty acids in circulation and it happens that females have much more often problems with the nerve degenerative symptoms of diabetes as well as being the ones that have the majority of type 1 diabetes during childhood. The effect of the free fatty acids on stress and glucose or any sugars protection against those stress reactions is one of the basic things to look at in avoiding hypoglycemic stress long before the problem reaches the stage of producing hyperglycemia and in hyperglycemia [19:34] what you have is the body's adjustment to the inability of cells to get enough energy because they can't oxidize glucose because the fats are blocking it. It's been known since the 60s called the Randall cycle in which free fatty acids block the use of glucose so the body tries to overcome that poisonous effect of the free fatty acids by increasing glucose production and so it can kind of get around the block just by stuffing more glucose into the blood so to a great extent the rising blood sugar shouldn't be fought in itself the cause that interferes with the use of glucose should be concentrated on and when cells can't get enough glucose it not only turns on the stress hormones it [20:37] turns off the production of thyroid hormone and so all diabetics if the cell isn't able to take up and use glucose the liver becomes unable to activate the pre-thyroid hormone the thyroxin turning it into the active T3 so supplementing the active T3 thyroid hormone will cure lots of the so-called effects of diabetes I had an old friend whose toes were basically rotting because of what was diagnosed as diabetes degenerative nerve and circulation problems in the legs and feet and two weeks after he had started using armory thyroid his [21:40] feet recovered completely his toes had been black with ulcerated sores going right into the bones but they completely healed up on thyroid but we went through three cycles in which his doctor said the armory thyroid was going to increase his blood sugar and make diabetes worse so you would tell him to stop it his feet would start rotting again so it wasn't just a coincidence we did three times yeah well good okay on that note Dr. Pete we do have several callers that are waiting up in a queue here so let's go ahead and the lights are flashing so let's go ahead and take the first caller caller you're on the air and where you from oh hold on I'm doing something you sir caller wait for a second I have a caller a question to [22:41] ask that a caller I know that and we're talking on the air right now your next caller I apologize so what's going on okay people love Dr. Pete I know absolutely swamped I know the flashing lights the lights are flashing Dr. Pete people are calling I'll take this and also you should ask them if they if they want to talk off the air ask them where they're calling from it was good to get an idea of demographics I'm actually yeah I know that so first I will we have so many caller listeners from all over the country who listen on the internet for this show and people need to understand that the K-Mod system can only handle 25 people at time I need to change that I got a I got a email from just a very side note I got an email from a person in England who listens to the show Dr. Pete and I'm going to be talking talking with them at some point here in the future yeah and so it costs us money to have more than 25 at a time and that is something we need to do but this is a plea to Dr. Pete's international listeners to please [23:42] support K-Mod so that you will always be able to listen to him over the internet and so so I have a question well one person wanted you to speak more in layman terms in general you're so eloquent and full of Latin that it's tough for you I'm sure but so in general that is a general idea and someone from Leggett has a friend with suspected CO2 poisoning and possible brain damage and was interested in nutritional ideas to address that hmm CO2 poisoning oh I'm sorry a carbon monoxide carbon monoxide yeah my bad okay yeah CO2 is it's one of the things that helps restore the cells that are damaged by carbon monoxide okay good good vitamin nutrition is helpful okay all right there you go so carbon dioxide and obviously nutrition of support and [24:42] thyroid hormone is the main thing we need to produce all the carbon dioxide is protective the diabetic or hypothyroid person is not producing enough energy from oxygen and glucose and so they very easily or even at rest turn some of the glucose into lactic acid and lactic acid displaces carbon dioxide from the blood and that has a stress-producing effect throughout the body and by simply breathing less rapidly or breathing in a bag occasionally to rebreathe and save your carbon dioxide you can increase the CO2 in tissues which activates the crev cycle stabilizes cells and shuts down the production of lactic acid so it has a direct connection to the [25:52] things that go wrong in diabetes as well as hypothyroidism to simply increase your CO2 and living at a very high altitude the body naturally does that because it isn't being overwhelmed with high pressure oxygen like at sea level okay let's take the next caller caller you're on the air and where you from yes this is David from Missouri oh hey David hello Andrew hello Dr. Pete this is off the subject a little bit but I've heard Dr. Pete in other podcasts refer to starch molecules as I think we call those molecules maybe they're like a crystal-like structure but they actually block capillaries if they somehow get into the bloodstream I mean I was just wanting him to elaborate on that a little bit more possibly on maybe what other research he had [26:57] mentioned one piece of research and I don't remember who that was specifically but I'm wondering if this is something that's fairly well known in the scientific community no it was something discovered a hundred years ago but in the 70s German immunologist Gerhard Volkheimer wrote some papers on it it's called persorption and he I think there's an article of his on the internet called persorption and it has illustrations of some of the junk that can simply get squeezed right through the lining of the intestine it isn't being squeezed between cells necessarily it can go right into the cytoplasm on one side and out the cytoplasm on the other side cells are much more flexible than people imagine particles as big as a hundred microns potato starch particles for [28:05] example if you eat a slurry of corn starch or potato starch or whatever on an empty stomach a few minutes later you can drop blood and find these particles which some of them are just the size of a red blood cell but others are as much as ten times the diameter of a red blood cell and red blood cells are very flexible so they can squeeze through capillaries with an opening that's only maybe five microns across and their diameter is ten microns and so even a ten micron particle of starch will plug up an arterial and shut down circulation to a whole block of capillaries fed by that arterial and the bigger the particle the bigger the small artery is that gets plugged up [29:07] and full timer would feed mice a high content of free starch in their diet and you found that they aged prematurely and when you slice them up you found that all of their organs contained little nests of dead deteriorating cells downstream from the plug of one of these starch molecules so Dr. Pete would these starch materials actually resist I mean does the body see this as an irritant and try to somehow expel it or is it just something that just stays there for long periods of time the body can produce the enzymes pretty much anywhere it needs to that can break down starch it isn't just saliva and intestine that has those enzymes but they can stay in place long enough as [30:08] he demonstrated for the tissue to die the bigger they are I suppose the longer they stay put killing tissue so when we're eating a potato and as you've mentioned before you know using like coconut oil or butter or some kind of saturated fat that's allowing that to basically I guess the word be like slide through the intestine rather than getting off to the side and going into the the bloodstream yeah if it's very well equipped it makes the starch particle easier to break down in the intestine and the the fat delays the absorption so it has time to break down more before it's absorbed so when you said the word I forgot this scientist name but he found all sorts of junk junk would be like other things that they're putting into our food too or like you know the silicates that you've mentioned that they use like to make a viscosity for the machinery to [31:13] like vitamins and minerals and different things like supplements that they produce and so those silicates would be one of those junk elements that probably lodge in different vessels in the body too right and I think the chemically modified cellulose molecules that are in practically everything some of those are toxic in themselves seem to have a catalytic effect and so that might be degrading the supplement right in the tablet that has hardly been studied just one or two papers on it and the silica particles not only get into the tissue but they have a toxic and allergenic or immunological effect Gerhard Fulkeimer being an immunologist was especially concerned about their role in degenerative and immune diseases but people specializing in the silica or silicone [32:25] reactions they found that supposedly amorphous silica glass like particles that they in themselves have some of the silicone like effects and even overlap with the crystalline effects that produce cancer in diabetes in silicosis from from asbestos crystals but it seems to be an activation of inflammation reactions the inflammasome particle responds to a certain shape of particle so if it has a given shape it doesn't matter too much whether it's asbestos or carbon or silicon or wood I think Fulkeimer mentioned feathers and wood particles sawdust how can I get through the [33:36] intestine and he showed that not only plugging up the blood vessels about 15 minutes after they can be detected in the blood they can be found in the liver in the bile having crushed another set of cell barriers and in the cerebrospinal fluid right into the brain and eventually some of them show up in the urine yeah you would think that maybe that would be contributing to like psoriasis and different skin disorders too because of it maybe reaching the surface capillaries is that possible I'm having an irritant it's especially theorized at least to contribute to the the various things like scleroderma silicone from breast implants has been connected to the generalized [34:40] scleroderma but even the the silica particles used as food additives are suspected as activating the inflammatory skin hardening diseases once you see these different things happening in the body it really informs you on what you eat I think that you of course you do you know I mean it just really kind of guides you about being careful about what you put in your mouth because I mean there's just so many things I'm gonna have to stop you there David I don't mean to be rude but no thank you that was great we really very much yeah we really appreciate your calls we do have three more callers at least I'd like to get people to get a chance here okay let's take the next caller caller you're on the and where you from it's just me yes wait where you from please right I'm from here in Darbleville okay go ahead well one thing real quick way back when [35:43] we were talking about diabetes and insulin you mentioned a few things that really seem to drive home the point that for pregnant women the best thing you can possibly do for them is keep them unstressed like for the baby for the future I've got a son myself he turned out pretty good but I'm thinking a lot of that was how much focus and attention there was on keeping the mother happy and unstressed yeah and one of the essential things of stress is falling blood sugar mm-hmm so mama craves whatever chocolate peanut butter ice cream pickles it's probably a good thing right yeah the glucose is essential for the baby's brain development and many older gynecologists and obstetricians knew that women diabetic women had the brightest babies even hugely fat women who [36:49] had diabetes and were not in good health themselves often produced extremely healthy babies and intelligent and you mentioned that intelligence was also higher in diabetic women because specifically because of the increased blood sugar yeah and not to dwell on that too much because that was actually a secondary point my main point was into the diabetes thing again and hypoglycemia specifically when I was younger a teenager I was diagnosed with hypoglycemia along with having really bad acne and through this conversation I'm realized a couple of things one it could all be tied back to the amount of unsaturated fat I've made consumed as a child if all that was blocking up my ability to even process the glucose I may have had some hypoglycemic symptoms at the same time as my body is trying to like just up and coagulate around every [37:55] obstacle that makes sense yeah a man named a demki wicks about 30 or 40 years ago showed that lowering blood sugar activates the inflammatory process and doubling the blood sugar will stop allergies to almost everything so the every episode of hypoglycemia is stressing your immune system as well as activating the stress hormones that compensate by turning protein into sugar do you expect that was at all related to my intense craving during those years for lots of sugar like donuts and chilled cola for lunch yeah that's the natural thing like in pregnancy when when a woman needs sugar or premenstrually same thing happens when your blood sugar falls you crave sugar and if your thyroid is just temporarily depressed by stress eating a pound of sugar over [39:07] a period of three days will sometimes replenish the glycogen stores in all of your tissues including the liver where the liver uses it to activate the thyroid hormone so sometimes to get back to the original point then the stress then besides being an adolescent I mean I'm now almost 35 and I've still got the act the stress then does that come from the unsaturated fat that's probably the most common reason for it but many kinds of stress can bring it on but I think that's that's the most common cause currently and there's a really great book by Broda Barnes called hypoglycemia it's your liver not your mind and okay he was one of the first people to point out that the liver provides three quarters of our active thyroid hormone and to do that it needs [40:14] glucose and without the active thyroid hormone you tend to get hypoglycemia and I assume alcohol in that factor would be a downer um yeah it interferes with the provision of glucose well thank you very much doctor okay thank you for your call call we've still got several more quarters on the line so let's take this next caller caller and where you're from who's this from Vancouver Washington oh hi you're on yeah go ahead I'm from Vancouver Washington thank you I did hear that go ahead with your questions I have to assist growing on each of my home or whatever I'm nervous go ahead no it's okay anyway right now they're at 6.9 centimeters and I'm 79 years old and my question is do I have them removed now where were these tests again [41:24] on my heart on my uh ovaries yes thank you go ahead dr. p this is that's the age thing no problem so dr. p I think you should have your blood hormones measured the cysts could be producing a lot of estrogen have you had ultrasounds yes I have an ultrasound every six months and are they enlarging yes slowly um the uh a blood test might show what's needed to break them sometimes just a one dose of uh progesterone is all that's needed for the cyst to uh break in the way it should during a normal menstrual cycle [42:24] so my my real question is do I do this at my age I mean is there a chance that I may not come out of it oh for surgery uh is if you're underweight especially and over 70 uh then any surgery uh tens uh in the six months following the surgery it increases all kinds of risk of of dying hmm well gosh hard thing to decide to do progesterone is a very very safe compound and it's certainly far safer than surgery so that would be a very good start and yes and progesterone should be something that would easily be prescribed by a doctor I'm I have an appointment so I'll [43:28] certainly bring this up there are of course other sources of progesterone that you can you can purchase also just so that the doctor if they refuse to do that then it's always possible to go elsewhere what what would I can you get it over the counter um several I mean in in California here there's several health stores I mean I think there's very many health stores but I don't get around the country too much but I've seen it certainly in health stores so there's a product called um progeste which is a natural progesterone and there's several there's several other types of of product that contain progesterone and that would be the thing that Dr. Pete's mentioning would be useful for you okay uh like I said I'm at 6.9 centimeters and listening to Dr. Oz one day he said if you get to 8 you've got to have them taken out is that um I've known [44:32] quite a few younger women with big cysts that were causing pain at least and uh they were with just one or two doses of progesterone that they they just simply broke and they had no more problem so is that the same as twisting if it twists itself no I think I think you're I think it's probably getting confused with two different things number one is a kind of natural a natural and spontaneous dissolution or breaking down and the other thing I think you might be confusing with twisted ovaries but not too sure but yeah pregnant and pregnant is one of those things you should definitely first ask your doctor for and if you can't get them from your doctor you can always find them online so progesterone is the thing you you want to try okay well I appreciate it thank you very much you're very welcome thank you if you're cool okay we still have three more [45:33] callers so let's take this next call away from caller um from Kansas City Kansas City hi okay hi um I have a question about niacinamide um in Dr. Pete in one of your articles you said that it can cause tumor cell to either mature or disintegrate but it prolongs the replicative life of culture cells could you explain that a little bit more to me please um it's needed to produce energy efficiently and uh it lowers stress so the increased energy and reduced stress simply stops the processes that tend to promote cancer but its its main effect is protective for nerve cells for example almost anything that ensures a nerve cell is protected [46:39] against by niacinamide okay thank you very much that explains it and I do have another question um in one of your interviews you said that a way of helping with extreme vaginal dryness is to use a suppository with a fairly high dose of vitamin a and a little vitamin e in a cocoa butter um how much would be a safe high dose of vitamin a and how much e oh um to um to make a suppository it depends on whether you're using a pure cocoa butter with that you can get probably a thousand milligrams of vitamin e and maybe 20 000 international units of vitamin a to dissolve in [47:40] one suppository okay and um how much uh I mean how often should one use this um the people who have told me about it uh did it every day okay um could also if I were to take vitamin a internally for to help with other issues how much is a safe dose to help with with what well with other issues I have liver issues I have a problem with my thyroid I mean with my esophagus and several other problems so vitamin a would be helpful but how much would be a safe dose taken internally it depends on the status of your thyroid exactly because the thyroid hormone and vitamin a are carried on the same [48:42] protein in the blood and if you uh take too much uh vitamin a it uh can act as an antagonist to thyroid it it acts like a polyunsaturated fat in competing against uh the thyroid hormone and uh can also block the production of adrenal and ovarian steroids if you get too much but 10 000 units a day if your thyroid is is okay people with very high thyroid activity sometimes need more like 50 000 international units of vitamin a because the the increased thyroid raises your requirement for vitamin a so it's important to adjust the dose to the thyroid function I see um I have Hashimoto so I am actually taking thyroid hormones um so would 10 000 [49:45] be too much for someone like me um yeah unless you're sure that your metabolic rate is up it's good to limit it to about 10 000 units a day okay well thank you so much appreciated thank you if you're cool okay it is actually five to eight now and I know we have one more call so I'm itching to find out where they come from but if you can be really quick call it with your question and Dr Pete if you could sum it up in a sentence if that's possible that will still leave me time to give people more information about you so next caller you're on the air where you're from hi there yes where you're from hi my name is Mike and I'm calling from New York New York cool okay we've got four minutes or less Mike so be quick with your question okay um well good evening Andrew and Dr Pete um I guess my first question would be with regards to diabetes what would you recommend Dr Pete that somebody with diabetes who's been uh has given all this propaganda about avoiding sugar and such that you recommended them to get a start and that they could see [50:45] benefit from and perhaps uh open up to trying more sugar and things like that well fruit is the best way to get your sugar um orange juice in the united states is the most reliable way to get sugar with every meal um milk is very important for several several reasons uh as a source of protein the uh high calcium as an anti-stress effect so emphasizing every day milk cheese protein and some eggs and uh other fruits avoiding the starchy fruits like like bananas and uh then if if you actually have a problem with high blood sugar uh which if it's only a uh like 130 milligrams percent that that wouldn't be a reason for working on the blood sugar but [51:48] supplementing brewer's yeast and aspirin are things that can help to actually lower the blood sugar and a thyroid supplement sometimes will help okay I think we're going to have to hold it there I'm afraid okay um let me just tell tell you uh tell everybody it's listening where you're uh where you can be contacted Dr Pete thanks so much for your time and and thank you callers okay so Dr Pete can be found online uh www.raypeatrypeat.com plenty of scholarly articles fully referenced quite a few different subjects but especially speciality is metabolic disorders uh thyroid disorders and hormones and aging so thank you so much again Dr Pete um we can also be reached toll free at 1-888 WBM herb for further questions in Monday through Friday uh and for all of those who have called in thank you so much for making the [52:49] show uh what's becoming a very uh a very universal shows like I said I've had callers from England and this month we've had callers from New York Washington Kansas and Missouri so I think that speaks for itself uh but thanks so much for listening and um until next March it's the third Friday of every month uh from seven to late p.m the show is pretty much exclusively given over to Dr Pete's wisdom at this point in time okay thanks so much