---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Breast Cancer
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ijoh1b7U_E
  mirrors:
    - https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-150320-breast-cancer.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ijoh1b7U_E
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-19"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-19"
ray-peat-rodeo:
  prev-paths:
    - /breast-cancer
---
 [0:00] Well, a very good evening to you all. This is Ask Your Herb Doctor on KMU-D Galberville 91.1 FM. From 7.30 to the end of the show at 8 o'clock, callers as usual are invited to call in with any questions. I would like to try and iterate that. I would really appreciate those people that are listening this evening to the show that have questions around the subject of the show. I'd really appreciate that. Just to keep Dr. Pete's attention focused firmly on the subject and to keep the listeners informed as much as possible about this month's subject, which is going to be about breast cancer. In the last couple of months, I've been approached by quite a few people, actually a startling number of people that have either known someone who's going through breast cancer treatment. I've met people that have been dying of breast cancer and it's just prompted me to bring this subject up again. I believe we have spoken about it in the past, but this month's show will be about breast cancer, awareness and prevention. I don't think we want to necessarily dwell on the treatment, [1:06] although we will mention those alternative medical treatments that are available and are showing pretty good promise for inhibiting estrogen, for example, with the aromatase inhibitors. But the prevention of it, I think, is the fundamental key to good health. We put people's diets and lifestyles in the right place to begin with. That preventive strategy is probably a better payoff. Okay, so you're listening to ask Dr. K.M.U.D. 91.1 FM. We're very pleased to welcome Dr. Pete to the show this evening and have his expertise with us. If you live in the area, the 923 number is 9233911. Or if you're outside the area, as a lot of people who call and do seem to be outside the area, there's a toll free number, which is 1-800-K-M-U-D-RAD. Or you can all terms of just go ahead and use the 707 area code, so it'll be 707-923-3911. So, just a very brief introduction for myself. My name is Andrew Murray, I graduated in England with a master's degree in herbal medicine, [2:08] I came to California with my wife, Sarah, who's very pleased to have on the show again this evening. Sarah? Good evening. My name's Sarah Johannes and Murray and I'm delighted to be on the show talking about ways to help prevent breast cancer. Okay, so we run a clinic in Garbeville where we see patients with a wide range of conditions treat them with verbal medicine and dietary advice as well as consult with people nationwide. Okay, so Dr. Pete, are you on the other line? Yes, you're right. Great, well thanks so much for joining us on the show. As always, I want to make sure people get an introduction from you about your academic and professional background before we get into tonight's subject. Okay, I'm a biologist, a PhD from the University of Oregon specializing in physiology, especially related to aging and reproductive hormone issues. Okay, excellent. So, for tonight, if not as always, it's a speciality that you have given that reproductive hormones are surrounding the picture of tonight's topic on breast cancer. [3:14] So looking at some articles that I was reading earlier on today, I think most people will recognize breast cancer awareness and the numbers of people that die from breast cancer as being fairly staggering. And I saw an article that was saying it was the leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide. What's your opinion of the causes of breast cancer in the first place and how does this differ from the medical interpretation? The animal studies have been pretty clear for almost a hundred years that it is a matter of an estrogen-like irritation, if not exactly estrogen in the narrowest sense, but the main carcinogenic substances such as in smoke and tar are estrogen-like in their structure [4:16] and the effect. So the breast is very sensitive to an imbalance of estrogen-like stimulation, so it's susceptible to anything that has an estrogen-like effect, including smoke and pollutants of various sorts. Is this down to the fact that the estrogen receptors are most concentrated in the breast tissue or some other reason? Well, every cell has estrogen receptors, but the way they interact with other functions, I think, is more important than the number of receptors, because once you're exposed to estrogen, a cell will produce more and more receptors, and progesterone has a very central function of destroying estrogen receptors, so a breast that's well balanced and exposed [5:24] to enough progesterone won't have very many estrogen receptors, progesterone dominant. Interesting, so you said that the actual exposure to estrogen will cause an up-regulation in the expression of estrogen receptors. Yeah, pretty much in any cell, and irritation in general will do that. A failure of energy combined with stimulation will make estrogen receptors start to appear, so that old people as the energy production decreases, any irritation tends to induce estrogen production, as well as sensitivity by the receptors. So interestingly, you're talking about the causal link, if you like, or the link between [6:25] estrogen and irritation and stresses, and I think later on that's one to bring out some more questions surrounding HRT and that kind of thing, and estrogen replacement therapy, and I know when we've talked about many different subjects, you do bring up estrogen as being a causative factor in a lot of inflammation and irritation, and saying at this point in time that estrogen can be directly responsible for cancers. The animal studies in the 30s and 40s were very clear that it isn't just the normally responsive tissues like the uterus and the breast that will cancerize under the influence of estrogen and similar things, but those are just the most sensitive, and with increased uninterrupted exposure to estrogen, the sequence tends to go first cancer of the uterus, then [7:34] cancer of the breast, then of the lungs, kidneys, intestine, and liver, and brain. Are you talking about primaries now or metastases? No, primary. Any tissue that is de-energized and irritated will develop not only the ability to respond to estrogen, but actual ability to make estrogen, so if your fat or your skin or liver can become a source of estrogen in proportion to how much stress you're under, even if you don't have ovaries. I was going to cover the subject, I'll try to remember the subject and for me to ask a question about fat and conversion to estrogen, go ahead. So it's not just a monthly cycling that's exposing women to estrogen. Estrogen is so prominent in the foods and in our environment, increasingly so with our [8:34] degradation of the environment. The irritation, the fat is particularly sensitive to it, it isn't very well supplied with defensive and energetic systems, so it seems to be a major age-related source of estrogen, especially if you're overweight. Interesting. Okay, so I think that's a subject that should be brought out a little more. So fats in their own right, and at this point in time are we talking polyunsaturated fats or fats in general? That was just your normal, ordinary fat cells, but since the polyunsaturated fats increase the deposition and storage of fat, and since they break down to form the inflammation promoting [9:38] prostaglandins, they make the fat cells more likely to produce excess estrogen. Do you think there's any strategy to be benefited by the, because I know you mentioned too about increasing the dominance in the body of saturated to unsaturated fat by avoiding polyunsaturates and ultimately over three or four years, you say that essentially the body fat composition could be turned back to a more saturated type of fat if you avoid the polys and eat. Yeah, there's a thing called the saturation index, which is just the ratio between a saturated fat like steric acid and the polyunsaturated, such as linoleic acid, and people with cancer have a higher polyunsaturation, lower saturation index. [10:44] But you're saying a saturated fat cell is still capable of producing estrogen? Yeah, the cell which is more saturated is stabler and less likely to produce estrogen, but the more highly polyunsaturated fats are very closely connected with estrogen so that the amount in the tissue and in circulation of say a five or six unsaturated fats such as you find in fish oil and you produce with aging, these are closely associated with the level of estrogen stimulation. So eating nuts and seeds that are high in those polyunsaturated fats and fried foods that are fried in those corn and canola oil is going to be more promoting than an estrogenic fat. And yeah, for 80 or 90 years, about every 10 or 15 years, someone has done a study [11:51] showing that the more polyunsaturated fat in the diet, the higher the cancer incidence, all the way down to extremely rare cancer incidents when there's no polyunsaturated fat in the diet. Well, good. I was really just hoping that this show would just highlight again the importance of what you've been mentioning for many years now about improving your saturated fat intake and being very aware of the sources of polyunsaturates both in pre-made foods as well as foods that you may choose to be cooking with and that the ramifications have a pretty wide cause and effect associated with them and cancer obviously is one of those effects of decreasing energy to promote suitable responses and that because it's thyroid suppressing effects, [12:52] that is a direct relationship between low energy and the ability for systems to lose their correct structure and organization in terms of doing the right thing. One of the diet factors that shows up repeatedly in association with a low rate of cancer is a high fruit intake and fruit eaters getting the carbohydrate and the sugar produce saturated fats of their own so they keep a relatively high saturation index in their tissues. Excellent. Okay, good. Well, you're listening to ask your Dr. K. M. D. Garbable, 91.1 FM. This evening's topic is breast cancer and if we do get any callers here between 7.30 and 8, it would be good if we can try and stay on the topic that we're discussing. Dr. Pete, HRT has always mystified me how HRTs carried on for such a long time. I know they're just talking about [13:57] it recently that it's maybe not the best thing for women now they're finally saying that like they are admitting that saturated fats are actually better for you than their polys but HRT is a concept. How do you think it came to a position where estrogen was such a promoted supposedly beneficial for your bones to help with things like age-related dementia, memory loss and it's actually the opposite. You have plenty of evidence to show that it's completely opposite to that. It's actually not good for your bones and it's actually increases the chances of dementia. There is a very good essay on the internet. I think it's still available, a Harvard Law School paper by Carla Rothenberg on the history of hormone replacement therapy. Carla Rothenberg? Rothen, R-O-D-H-E-N-B-E-R-G. It gives the political economic history of how the 12 big estrogen companies in 1942 got together [15:06] to basically take over the FDA medical journals and universities to indoctrinate the idea that estrogen was the female hormone that would promote fertility and all the good female virtues even though it went absolutely against the research of the 1930s which showed that progesterone was the essential female hormone that promoted fertility and good pregnancy success. I mean they knew back in the 1800s that the chimney sweeps would die of testicular cancer from the estrogenic effects of the soot. Yeah but this was all turned around by these 12 giant companies getting together to promote the idea of the estrogen as the beneficial female hormone and so they came on the market with the idea that I think it was a Harvard husband and wife pair of doctors that promoted [16:11] the idea that you should give pregnant women estrogen to prevent miscarriage and that produced the generation of DES babies but two generations actually their daughters also were susceptible to cancer and after the news got out by the late 50s that estrogen was not good for preventing miscarriage they came out with the contraception idea. They knew in the 30s that estrogen causes miscarriages and abortion and so they sold it for the opposite as long as they could get away that then came out on the market to sell it to prevent or interrupt pregnancies. So a lot of contraceptive pills allow pregnancy or fertilization to occur but inhibits implantation is that correct? Yeah my thesis advisor Arnold Soderwald [17:20] did some very clear research on that showing that a small amount at the time of or just just before implantation would prevent implantation but a slightly larger amount after implantation had occurred would cause it to be ejected and he made a graph showing that at each stage of pregnancy just slightly increasing the dose of estrogen would cause miscarriage all the way from preventing implantation to aborting it at any stage it would cause the embryo to die and simply be resorbed. That's incredible it's like another worldwide I don't know we're going to call it brainwashing I don't know what it is I think it's so commonly repeated these these different topics are so commonly repeated by broad stream media [18:24] and those in for one of the better word power the doctors for example who are looks up to and respected by most people that go to see them for their education and their prowess if you like I don't know that I just find it's so so incredible that there's evidence out there to show the opposite in very many cases it takes such a long time to make an impression for it to get enough groundswell for the tide to get turned on this kind of thing I mean estrogen has been ever since I can remember it's been the beneficial female hormone and HRT and my mum was on HRT and I know all these other women on HRT and it's it's probably the probably one of the worst things you can do several years ago someone did a survey of the publications just in the journal of the American Medical Association in the first years after the industry got this conspiracy together they found that [19:25] 200 different health conditions have been published in that one journal as treatable or curable or presentable by estrogen all of those 200 turned out to be false oh my goodness the quantity and quality of the fraud is just staggering to understand staggering now didn't well it's all marketing marketing marketing yeah well what I wanted to um what I wanted to ask you was I think I remember hearing something like the only thing well and I and I and I've not heard you say that just a moment ago unless I've got it round the wrong way I thought the only really only beneficial thing that estrogen was used for was really for getting pregnant but you're saying that actually estrogen at this time of pre just preconception or post conception would actually abort the fetus yeah so Soderbal was probably the most concise in this experiment in in showing that it was [20:31] exactly a dose relationship and you could shift to that dose relationship by increasing either the amount of progesterone or vitamin E as antagonists to that and my dissertation showed that that interaction worked through the availability largely of oxygen estrogen cuts off the availability of oxygen to the embryo making the uterus a short circuit of burn up in effect the oxygen before the embryo gets it and progesterone and vitamin E both improve the delivery for preservation of oxygen for the if could you just repeat the name of the author again and I wouldn't mind taking a look at if I can find out this information myself what was the name of the author of that um Arnold Soderwald Soderwald how do you s o d e r s o d r w a l and didn't [21:40] and didn't you say a l l okay well got it didn't you say dr Pete that they didn't promote progesterone for all these 200 different diseases because it's so expensive to manufacture and estrogen is so cheap to manufacture then they wanted to make more money off the estrogen more than that it was that they knew in the 30s someone simply put a a glass plate in the smoke of a candle and then extracted the soot and found that they had a whole variety of chemical substances soot essences which were estrogenic as well as carcinogenic and so they understood that there was an infinite opportunity for having a patentable specific estrogen that you could market as your own product but anytime you change the molecule of progesterone you decrease or destroy its effect [22:44] right and so all those synthetic progestins actually have an estrogenic effect I mean yeah because progesterone part of its effect is what it turns into and the additives attached to the progesterone molecule specifically block its conversion into that natural range of wow other steroids and since the brain is a major source and a user of progesterone probably the worst effect of the synthetic progestin is that they interfere with brain brain function oh my gosh so here's a here's a hormone that helps breast cancer patients helps pregnancies this has all these pro-life wonderful effects and they can't patent it because it's a natural hormone so it's not promoted [23:47] and it's not sold readily available a marion diamond a professor at university of california did studies on the animals showing that estrogen in pregnancy stops the growth of the brain especially the cortex makes it thinner and smaller progesterone increases the growth especially of the cortex of the brain making it bigger more intelligent and less psychopathic and catherine adultin working in england with her human patients found accidentally the same thing turning out that the women who were having pregnancy difficulties before treatment their older kids averaged below 100 IQ once she treated them and prevented their [24:48] toxemia of pregnancy the kids averaged over 130 IQ and isn't it quite expensive for companies to manufacture pure bioidentical progesterone well not compared to what drugs generally cost but i mean if the raw material if they if you compared raw material for estrogen if it's just soot yeah you can get a thousand doses of estrogen for a dollar and only a few doses of progesterone for a dollar so that it just all comes down to the dollar yeah the money i wanted to very quickly bring i think we have a call on the line but we'll take that in a moment here i just wanted to bring out um this thing before we would move on to strategies uh to help women especially um because men do get breast cancer but the numbers are fairly low but women especially um to improve their improve their odds of not getting cancer by avoiding all those things dr p that you're going to bring out uh from stress [25:52] and its related effects with estrogen and everything else that tamoxifen was a drug that was used to treat breast cancer actually promoted endometrial cancer and thromboembolic events in so many people that it was given to and liver tumors and high damage okay and you mentioned that it's actually an estrogenic drug itself very powerful estrogenic drug just talk about that it's less powerful than estradiol and so it can protect against the over production of estradiol but in itself it's estrogenic yeah incredible okay well let's take this let's take this call and see where we're going with this hello call you're on the air and where you from hi from Kansas City hey we're on the air go ahead um in last month's interview on urea dr p mentioned it up to 120 grams per day 15 grams at a time for getting rid of excess water [26:52] when you said excess water what were you what were you referring to exactly um that's interesting in relation to estrogen because uh within about five minutes of an exposure to estrogen cells begin to take up a lot of water and that excess water stimulates cell division and growth and that's part of the process of promoting cancer growth is to keep them in an excited inflammatory state of too much water which keeps them from differentiating and functioning but makes them able to keep dividing and uh so the uh one one of the uh principles of uh cancer treatment should be looking at the body's water economy um one of the question on that what um so how long [27:56] or how often for the 120 grams of urea per day to actually have that benefit um the um a greek doctor uh denopoulos uh was using uh urea in various forms uh injecting it right in the tumors for example also giving it intravenously and uh it can be applied in crystal or or a solid form to an open superficial tumor uh it's a very strange material because it uh doesn't destroy tissue when even in a pure crystalline concentrated form and the uh injecting of 50 percent solution or a concentrated solution uh is possible if it goes in slowly but people are used to thinking of an osmotic effect from a concentrated crystal and material but [29:02] urea isn't an osmolite it has a very strange interaction with water it can go into cells freely just like the water so what it's doing to remove excess water from cells isn't osmotically drawing out the water it's uh doing something adjusting the structure of the cell so that it doesn't have have that excited uh need to retain water and the typical intravenous dose would use a 30 percent solution giving maybe 20 grams at a time but up to a total of 120 grams per day which could be either for using it as a diuretic for heart failure or for inflammation of the brain when the brain is holding too much water because of a [30:06] disturbance of the antidiuretic hormone or vasopressin or in treating cancer so 20 or 30 grams at a time can also be given orally and is well absorbed and circulates systemically so it doesn't have to be intravenous and if it is used intravenously it has to be added to a physiological solution of sodium chloride or glucose five or ten percent solution of glucose can have 30 percent or not necessarily that amount but it can have a full load of urea added to it so you're saying that you could do 20 to 30 grams a day which is probably about a couple teaspoons yeah that much up to 120 grams and then you'd want to dissolve it in a little salt [31:11] water or fruit juice um the people recommending it for treating heart failure they've had patients staying on it for years where the other diuretics were disturbing their mineral metabolism that they were very stable on using urea and they recommended using about 20 grams at a time in a glass of fruit juice and doing that several times a day so that's probably like two-thirds of an ounce and urea is a commonly available compound very cheap very inexpensive and there's been lots of studies showing it's benefit okay well thank thanks for your call caller um dr p what i wanted to um i just if i could just briefly ask your opinion of the cause of breast cancer then we can look at the similar strategies that people can employ to negate that or prevent it the standard opinion is that it's a a genetic [32:23] thing either inherited or occurring randomly and the evidence is just overwhelming against that the genetic problems almost always develop after the cancer is in progress uh the uh overstimulation and under under supply of energy to the cell uh keeps the uh DNA from being repaired uh so uh the stress causes the mutation rather than the mutation causing the cancer but the uh the inherited genes such as uh what's it called the BRCA right yeah BRAC1 and 2 yeah uh that is simply an indication that the person is is more sensitive [33:24] to uh stress and estrogen toxic effects uh so the anti estrogen programs are more important more effective for protecting them okay all right well you're listening to ask your doctor k midi galboville 91.1 FM uh from now until the end of the show eight o'clock we're inviting callers to ask questions or uh contribute with whatever they are experiencing with if they have questions for dr p around tonight's subject of breast cancer numbers nine two three three nine one one if you're in the area or there's an eight hundred number which is one eight hundred k m u d rad has one eight hundred five six eight three seven two three so dr p let's look quickly look at a strategy a strategy a lifelong strategy for like it's never too late to change um some people leave it till the last minute some people get on board fairly quickly but in terms of the strategy to prevent um that likelihood of occurring given that you're saying it's very much stress related [34:29] and the effects of stress probably uh bringing in things like nitric oxide and estrogen directly increased in stress how would you how would you look at best avoiding that when you when you look at stress of the falling blood sugar and rising lactic acid are universal features of stress and it happens that lactic acid is the main signal for producing the endorphins the endogenous opiates and uh the uh if you look at the effects of stress uh they're very closely all down the line associated with an excess and a prolonged uh production of the uh endogenous opiates and uh uh everything that uh is uncomfortable uh will increase your tendency to overproduce lactic acid [35:37] hyperventilating for example from anxiety when your carbon dioxide goes down your lactic acid goes up and uh and strangely the uh endorphins didn't get any of of the uh bad connotations of morphine well i know i mean you hear the word endorphin and you think gosh it's good yeah i study at university of california in san diego uh in the uh i think it was dermatology department uh they were uh experimentally giving people massages and measuring their various stress hormones they saw that massaging lowered the beta endorphin and uh everything pain or over exertion anything that interferes with the energy supply will increase the opiates or endorphins so you would think that having a massage would increase [36:42] your endorphins when in reality of course it's the opposite of what you're told because endorphins are not good okay all right let can i move on to the aromatase inhibitors that are i think i've become well i think what dr pit was trying to get to there is that the low dose nautrexone is being used therapeutically by a lot of doctors and it's very useful because it lowers those endorphins that are so harmful all those endogenous opiates opiates your body produces naturally that can be harmful in times of stress yeah and everything you do that's good uh pleasure such as as the uh massage will have that same effect of protecting you against the endorphins and nitric oxide so the uh the naloxone or nautrexone low dose treatment has a wide range of anti-stress effects including protection against uh promotion of cancer [37:47] now and the happy factor too right um well serotonin and endorphins are often called the happy hormones but actually they are the most positive important mediators of of stress and downstream even though estrogen turns on uh lactic acid and endorphins and nitric oxide the endorphins in turn activate estrogen receptors aromatase prolactin which acts as an amplifier of estrogen's effect you get this back and forth action increasing inflammation estrogenicity and lowering energy production wow so what can we do dr pete to lower this estrogen [38:47] with our diet um the foods that naturally contain uh anti aromatases i think are are very important i always mention orange juice and guavas but there are lots of fruits and vegetables that contain similar chemicals so the naryngin is found in uh in orange juice but also in higher levels in the in the skins is that what you were saying dr pete oh yeah the orange is the skin orange skin both the juice and the uh the the healing uh contains the protective things so marmalade is another source of uh the protective substances anti estrogen breast cancer preventative compound and then what about ap genin that's another aromatase inhibitor that you were mentioning um yeah i think guavas and celery and parsley are [39:54] uh highest sources of that okay and cox two inhibitors were another rationale for blocking aromatase um yeah aspirin for about 20 years i've been mentioning aspirin as as probably the safest first thing that anyone who worries about breast cancer should start uh it is a very effective way to turn off estrogen production and uh response to estrogen and how much a day would you recommend people with uh aggressive uh cancer uh probably should take four to six grams and in that case uh they also need to take vitamin k to prevent a bleeding problem [40:55] yeah take um up until the i had a patient who was taking six grams of aspirin a day and they just started to get the ear ringing so up until that point where you get the ear ringing then you know you you're at the maximum and you want to back off just slightly until you don't get that ear ringing but you have to use a milligram not a microgram a milligram of vitamin k for every normal standard aspirin tablet which is 325 milligrams i just wanted to bring out a couple of uh plant-based aromatase inhibitors that i i know we were taught about when we were studying um mistletoe uh mistletoe has been shown to be a aromatase inhibitor and i know work was done with cancer probably for that same reason or maybe inadvertently they figured that it was helpful probably through a estrogen blocking activity well do you know much about uh mistletoe and it's uh how it would physiologically how um you would rational rationalize it about 50 years ago i i ran into some anthroposophy people who got me interested in it and [42:03] so i've followed the uh the research on it but i i don't think anything very very new has turned up okay because the other things they mentioned were and you did mention this last month uh white button mushrooms i think the brown button mushrooms are just the same kind of compounds but there are aromatase inhibitors in white button mushrooms and i know you mentioned a a dose last month and that would be a realistic dose as an aromatase inhibitor um yeah the chinese study found that uh the women who had at least 10 grams a day on average had extremely low uh cancer mortality and especially if they had green tea to like 88 lower okay and then i think the last two things were coffee and um and green and tea coffee and green tea yeah and normal black tea too i mean they would all have the same [43:03] yeah right compound okay and i did there was a caller who called in about black cohosh and that is an estrogenic herb and i would not recommend that for treatment or use with patients with uh breast cancer or i would not recommend it to prevent breast cancer okay so people people that are going through um breast cancer treatment and i i don't mean to ask you about this because i know you're definitely not in favor of it but the chemotherapy radiotherapy approach to cancer it's just not doing it is it um yeah there is a website that i'm not sure what what is available on it but he has written some very good articles on the issue of when and whether to treat certain types of cancer uh his name is Gershom Zeichek oh right okay z-a-j-i-c-e-k and his accent now that he has uh youtube videos it's hard to understand so if you can find his [44:07] written articles they're quicker to get through but um from the time of Hippocrates i think Hippocrates said that for internal cancer uh patients uh who are not treated the last a long time but those who are treated die quickly and Gershom Zeichek makes a similar point and 50 years ago a Berkeley professor Hardin Jones did a study and clearly showed that the longer a person waits before treating a cancer the longer they live well and also there was a study that showed 95 percent of people over the age of 50 had some form of abdominal cancer yeah at autopsy if they died before yeah if they died like in a car crash or for some other unrelated to cancer reason and 95 percent of people do not die of cancer so another person said that looking at all of the organs 100 percent of people by the [45:12] age of 50 have diagnosable cancer somewhere yeah we do we do have a caller on the air so let's take this take this next caller caller you're on the air where you from uh Garberville here downtown Garberville okay go ahead uh thank you gentlemen and lady for uh your wisdom and your knowledge i have a question about a while back i thought i understood that uh in all the skunky vegetables cabbage brussel sprouts uh that kind of stuff uh that there's a lot of estrogen in those vegetables naturally is that true they certainly contain lots of sulfur compounds um dr p uh i think there is a well there there's so thyroid suppressive that they allow estrogen to build up naturally in men and women because men actually usually have a lot higher levels of estrogen than women but are they directly estrogenic dr p um there are some studies in animals showing a direct [46:12] estrogenic effect of uh dim and uh it's metabolite ip3 yeah those are commonly touted as uh breast cancer preventative endometrial cancer cancer preventative uh compounds and dr p just said that there's lots of studies showing that they can have estrogenic effects in and of themselves so i would say that uh sometimes they probably do have good effects but i would uh wait for more research on them okay well i'm not going to worry about how many brussels sprouts or cabbage i eat and i want to thank you kindly for your wealth of information dr pete over the over the years here thank you goodnight well if you're still listening uh caller you can cook your your kale which is the most nutritious out of all of them very very well and cook it with lots of coconut oil and you will reduce some of the thyroid suppressive effects excellent thank you [47:13] okay all right um so were you going to say anything dr pete yeah on on the topic of of stress and cancer uh about 15 or 20 years ago carol simon simonton was in the news uh recommending uh emotional therapy or uh changing your attitude uh visualizing uh trying to uh have uh anything to reduce stress uh as a way to uh improve survival he noticed that uh he was he was a radiation uh uh treater of cancer and he noticed that with the same treatment uh his patients who were cheery or lived longer and uh later a group at stanford and uc berkeley uh did a study in which one group of women with advanced breast cancer uh were given uh some kind of emotional [48:20] counseling a similar number uh was just treated in a standard way okay the ones with the counseling live twice as long yeah yeah the mind mind body connection is underestimated so it shows the mind controls all we do have another caller on the air so let's take this call up caller you're on the air and where you from hello caller you're on the air where you from yes hello hi um yeah i'm i'm from garville um i'd like to you you mentioned the the cabbage and the and you should turn the radio down call it because uh your radio is on or there's some things on oh okay well i want to is it okay now and it's just the same oh okay hold on i'll put it down um [49:24] well while we're waiting for hello is that better yeah that's better thank you okay um yeah i always heard that i think they call cruciferous vegetables like yes the brassicas and broccoli and uh cauliflower and and cabbage were very anti-cancer and we're good for you and especially the colon now um i tend to like to eat a lot of raw cabbage and salad is that is it any better if you don't cook it or you do cook it you say that it suppresses thyroid yeah it suppresses your basic energy currency or your body your body's ability to use oxygen and if it's raw it's very um very potent actual thyroid drugs used to treat hyperactive thyroid or have the same exact compound that's in cabbage juice so raw cabbage is particularly harmful to your energy metabolism of your body but leaves leaves in general uh can stimulate the intestines so it has a speedier transit and uh that reduces the recycling of estrogen the liver [50:27] excretes estrogen in the bile and if you have slow transit tend to be constipated then much of that estrogen is reabsorbed and circulates again in the body so in other words if you do eat like something like cabbage it can make the everything move through your intestines more quickly right but they're safer things you can eat to move get your intestines moving like raw grated carrot and you could eat spinach or chard that you cook with a little bit of baking soda and that will get your intestines moving well what about what about raw foods what about uh I heard that you know that they have good enzymes in them they help digest the cooked food like if you have you know salad with uh raw uh okay carrots and and and cabbage and lettuce and that sort of thing that that's good for you Dr. Pete there's always the risk that since humans can't digest cellulose at all but bacteria can the uncooked food is a great for bacterial [51:29] of replication but very poor for human nutrition and so it's a risk and and can cause uh well what about fresh fruit well fresh fruit doesn't have such high cellulose content yeah the low low fiber fruits are very good so but you wouldn't you don't think raw vegetables I mean I always thought only raw carrot because the bacteria can't digest the raw carrot fiber like they can but if everything if it helps move through your intestines quickly well then that's why you choose the things that are safer to help your intestines move more quickly well then why do we keep hearing that one of the best things to eat to prevent cancer is the cruciferous vegetables unfortunate misinformation it's why do we keep hearing that HRT is supposed to be protective for your bones why do we keep hearing that estrogen is good for you why do we keep hearing that sugar is bad for you it's unfortunate I think we have to call that the evening but thank you so much for callers who called in and thank you Dr. Pete for your time I'll just let [52:31] people know how to get hold of you um yeah I think I just want to sum this show up by saying that what you've heard this evening have a have a rethink about it because you probably never really heard it before and what you have heard is not the truth and it's so easy it's so easy to get brainwashed by media and by companies producing products that it's very important that you do your own research because you will find the truth out there and people like Dr. Pete have spent in most of his life researching either directly or looking at peer reviewed papers and looking at the scientific evidence so it's unfortunate we get bombarded but we do have the ability to turn on the turn on the computer and do our own research but just thanks once again for joining us with the show um his number or rather his website is www.raypeat.com r-a-y-p-e-a-t [53:35] and we can be reached Monday through Friday uh on our toll free number 1-888-WBM-ERB so good night thank you for listening my name is Sarah Johanneson Murray and my name is Andrew Murray good night you all right everybody 759 in the p.m. you got to turn in k-m-u-d garberville 91.1 fm and hd1 k-m-u-e rica 88.1 fm and hd1 k-l-a-i latinville 90.3 fm shelter cove's got us at 99.5 and the rest at kmud.org the sport for our k-mud comes from the end of the lost coast in shelter cove fireplace spa [54:39] and sauna suites overlooking the ocean to offer views of the migrating california gray whales fish tank
