---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Water Quality, Atmospheric CO2, and Climate Change
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5a4QAa8I-Y
  # also https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-160115-water-quality-atmospheric-co2-climate-change.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5a4QAa8I-Y
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-21"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-21"
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. My name is Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of you perhaps who have never listened to the shows before, which run every third Friday of the month from 7 p.m. to late p.m., we're both licensed medical herbalists who trained in England and graduated there with a master's degree in herbal medicine. Okay, so I'm gonna start the intro a little bit differently this month. Thank you so much for joining us. As always, we'll run the lines, the call-in lines live from 7 30 to 8 o'clock. Be very keen to have people who are asking questions about the relevant subjects that we're going to bring out this evening, but if you do have any other questions, feel free. So let me see here. Let's just get straight into our introducing Dr. Pete and we'll go from there. I'd explain what we're going to be talking about after we've introduced Dr. Pete this evening. So Dr. Pete, you with us? Yes. Okay, thanks so much for joining us. As always, very [1:02] happy, very pleased, very, you know, very honored to have you on the show giving your time freely, the way you have done countless times, not just for us, but for other radio shows on I know across America. For those people who perhaps have never heard of you before, I think they're gradually decreasing in numbers as the internet gets more and more coverage and people spread the the truth. Let's not say the new, but the truth about what it is you've been exposing for the last 40 years in terms of mainstream medicine and the ideology and dogma that's pervaded most of mainstream media and ideology. Would you just let people know where your educational academic background is from and the kind of subjects that you've been specializing in before we open up tonight's topics. From 1968 to 72, I studied at the University of Oregon Biology, specializing in physiology, especially reproductive aging [2:03] physiology. Before that, it was linguistics and literature mostly. Since then, I've been studying the implications of the research I did for my PhD. I know that your specialty is thyroid and hormones, reproductive hormones. I know we've covered some of the contents of what we're going to bring out tonight. For tonight's topics, I wanted to carry on with the loosely termed nitrosamines formed. I know we've talked about it in food, but also as a component of water. I wanted to get into water quality. I've got a few articles to cover and a couple of fairly recent mandates by the EPA and how that ties into the policies that are being formed in America in allegiance [3:05] with the United Nations and how the United Nations mandates in America are becoming more influential and how that relates constitutionally to how things are enacted here in America having a constitution like we do. I wanted to mention a gentleman called Richard Radcliffe. He's a chemist and a water resource engineer. He studied water for 15 years or so. He states that there's hundreds, if not thousands, of disinfection byproducts that form when chlorine is added to water disinfectant. The scary thing he says is that he studied it for 15 years and that they can only identify about 50%!o(MISSING)f them and that most are likely to be carcinogenic. He said that he simply don't know all the byproducts they're creating by disinfecting water with chlorine. Now for us, this is a side note, but for us obviously, we manufacture medicinal herbs. We use spring water. We're very fortunate that we don't live in the city. We don't use municipal water. If I did, I would be using bottled water or [4:06] spring water or water from some other non-municipal source anyway because the idea, very idea of having chlorine in the water and creating some kind of medicine from this is abhorrent. But what's your view of chlorine in the water and how it interacts with the organic components that are still present even though to some extent it's filtered and micro-filtered and they're byproducts and how that relates to human health? Some city water departments have discovered that it's doable to use ultraviolet light or peroxide hydrogen or ozone, various oxidizing methods that don't leave any residue. In fact, they tend to oxidize and detoxify any of the chemical contaminants that are in the water. I did hear from the redway water [5:12] department that they are thinking or the Garberville redway area, our local area here, that they're thinking of using ultraviolet light to start disinfecting the water. And Michael, did you have something to say? I can comment. I'm actually on the redway board. We do have a spring that's coming on which is very, very clean water to begin with and we're planning on using an ultraviolet light to disinfect that. But the state still makes us chlorinated after that. There's a bunch of different things. I think the ultraviolet light does not kill some sort of like jardy or something. It's a tough technology to work and I personally am very, very interested in it because as much as our health is impacted, it's also what comes out. The sewage waste is treated and you know any chromium for instance you have in that instead of being diavalent chromium becomes hexavalent chromium and there's lots of problems. We use UV after it as a post-treatment so everything gets filtered first. Yeah, I mean a good filtration helps a lot but for city water the state really makes you chlorinate stuff and any of the quote [6:15] spring water that you're buying, any commercial water you bought has been treated with chlorine and hyper filtered so it's much more cost-efficient to buy the very best filter you can and use that on the municipal water because they're using municipal water at the water spring. Even in our local South Fork Mountain water? Maybe not that but you'd have to check. They're certainly chlorinating it before their reverse osmosis. I'm not 100%!s(MISSING)ure but really check your source and any of the mainstream waters are owned by Coca-Cola and PepsiCo and whatnot. Oh yeah, I know. I know. We know that. Smart water. Getting back to you Dr. P and your take on the chlorination issue. Well if you have to use city water I think it's good to at least let it stand in an open container for 12 hours or so or eat it to drive off as much of the chlorine and organic chlorides as possible. Yeah. Do you have any experience either in [7:19] research or just in the scientific literature about the effects of chlorine reacting with organic compounds to form toxic byproducts? Not no particular research but chlorine just it's a very powerful oxidizer and so it reacts with anything. Any carbon compound that happens to be dissolved in water? Okay because the next thing that I found when I was looking at this is that chlorine seems to be somewhat going out of fashion. I know that when they pump water through municipal pipe work that because the network is getting so extensive now that because chlorine is so volatile some of the some of the effectiveness of the chlorine has been reduced and so now they're using chloramines and it's a kind of compound ammonia and chlorine together. It's a lot more persistent. You [8:23] can't just let it evaporate in a container or anything like that and it's extremely hard to filter out believe it or not. I think you have to have a very good quality carbon wrap filter in order to bind those compounds to it but I think probably what was more interesting was that the toxic byproducts from chloramination are far more, they were stated as a thousand times more toxic. Have you heard of chloramination? Just vaguely but it's relating to the research that started around 1970 on the nitrosamines. The chloramine largely breaks down to form the nitrosamines, the NDMA nitrosodymethylamethyl [9:24] amine and I think there is pressure from the food and agricultural industry to propagandize that the nitrosamines aren't carcinogenic which they were established to be 40 some years ago because it's profitable to fertilize heavily with nitrogen fertilizer and also to preserve foods with nitrates and nitrites and so there's a lot of propagandistic science publication going on saying that rather than being toxic the nitrites and nitrates and even the nitrosamines they're not only supposed to be non-carcinogenic but they're now saying that they're even beneficial to the health reducing heart disease and reducing cancer and helping to build muscle and so on because these are the [10:28] very things they've been saying are carcinogenic about nitrates in in meats that's kept you treated with nitrates and yeah that was a big thing around 1970 when they saw that babies that were fed pureed spinach for example sometimes turned blue because of the interference of hemoglobin yeah with making the hemoglobin unable to carry oxygen like it binds to hemoglobin doesn't it yeah and the nitrates do that even when we make them internally from proteins under stress but because of the the food industry concern about selling their products there there has been this reaction saying that it was only a few farms that had nitrate contaminated water that really were causing the baby [11:34] problems right and this would have been from a kind of chemical runoff a fertilizer or manure runoff yeah and and they tried to reduce it to nothing but the blue baby phenomenon and to distract attention from the really universally recognized tumor promoting potential of all of the nitrates and nitrosamines I've also understand that this compound a chloramine is extremely toxic to kidney dialysis patients they can't use water for dialysing if it's been treated with chloramine and it's extremely toxic to fish yeah did you hear that dr. P I didn't yeah sorry okay all right now Sarah did Michael our engineer has something to tell us about the chloramines oh well just that they are super super toxic in the the triclosan hand sanitizers they're all [12:39] that same chemistry and actually I first inquired at my water district long before I was on the board about whether we used chlorine or chloramine because I grew up in the Bay Area where they use chloramine and apparently our chemical we asked the office asked and our chemical supplier said I wouldn't even sell that poison so that's someone who sells chlorine for a living he claims he wouldn't even sell that quote poison of the chloramine so the redway Garberville water is treated with chlorine oh the redway water Garberville I believe is too but we're separate oh okay yeah almost everyone is using chlorine these days but obviously some people are still using chloramine yeah thank you Michael okay you're listening to ask your doctor on KMUG Garberville 91.1 FM from 7 30 to the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call him of any questions either related or unrelated to this month's subject of water quality are we going to be getting into global warming and a couple of other controversial subjects that's there let's just leave it at that until we get to the point here okay so dr. P getting on to getting on to their potential [13:47] toxins if you like from the byproducts of breakdown reacting with chlorine and chloramines surely the and again it's a kind of a difficult a difficult question just to say what do you do because it really is a consequence of just modern living where we're all living in sit well we don't fortunately but you know modern living in cities having a government take care of your water supply rather than you taking care of it and then the government coming up with these kind of policies like chlorine and chloramine without and having this kind of a lesser of two evils rationale for it that there's far few people hurt from the toxic byproducts and there is that they would die from dysentery or some other related you know fecal contamination or you know that kind of thing how do you feel about city I mean you live a new gene don't you yes yeah [14:47] okay so do you do anything particularly to your water oh yeah we always filter it we never drink it yeah even though it comes from a kenzie river which is one of the least polluted rivers but just because of the chlorine issue we never drink clean water right and if you make coffee with city water that's one of the practical ways of filtering it go on heavy metals are very efficiently bound to the coffee grounds if you make the drip method coffee to the coffee grounds yeah so that you put in dirty water and you get clean coffee okay interesting okay so I don't know that Michael said that there was somebody who was on the out I don't know if there is yeah if they're there with us let's take them and see okay caller you're on the air and where you from hey I'm from whale [15:54] Gulch okay go ahead watch your question I want to ask the doctor what his opinion is of medical marijuana and the possibility of its use to everybody okay dr. P for its use for what he said everybody oh well I mean unity to the world you know medical marijuana is a wonderful thing it can ease a lot of difficult situation when I was about nine years old a doctor prescribed marijuana and gave me a big paper bag about a half a cubic foot of marijuana leaves to make a tea and I took it every day for until the bag was used up but I wasn't especially impressed by it all I did my problem was just my grains occasionally but I know it is very good for you have to [17:00] be very careful it's a very powerful herb you know and you want to just take the minute quantities of it in order to get the maximum gentle feeling of the of the drug okay thanks for your call caller okay okay and also I don't know if anybody's listening if they do want to call in please don't have your radio on it really interferes with the dynamics here in the show okay so dr. Pete I also saw whilst I was looking at the whole chloramination issue that there was a nationwide study on water treatment contaminants done by the EPA and it reported that chloraminated drinking water had the highest levels of an unregulated chemical family known as the iodo acids have you heard of the I'd never even heard of these things no I don't know so they carried on to say that some researchers considered the iodo acids to be potentially the most [18:01] toxic group of water treatment contaminants found to date but they did also say they're still relatively little research on them so okay so that's that's the water I know that as I said kind of municipal entities want to keep themselves covered and that when the EPA allow these things they're certainly not going to stop using them as Michael what do you what do you have these oh that means another call okay I wasn't sure if you wanted to say something cool let's say this next caller then hi call you oh you're on the air and where you from hi I'm in Creston City Creston City what's your question I wanted to I just I was doing other things when I heard you talk something about chlorine in the water and I I've noticed when I take a water bottle a water you know on a hike with me recently and I open it up I get a blast of chlorine of gas coming out and so what I've started doing is you know I you know I have cups of water you know around the house so I can drink water and so what I do now is I feel a [19:08] cup of water and I just leave it sitting around and it'll out gas and you know because chlorine's a gas so there's there's two products basically I guess you would be concerned about one is the gas which is real easy to get rid of you don't need a filter you just fill a bottle or a bottle that sit around for a couple hours or days I'm not sure how long and then the other thing is the the chlorine that's already reacted with biological or organic matter in your water yeah and that you might I suppose get with a filter although I don't know how much that is some of that you've ever there's two things there's that chlorine gas and then there's molecules or organic matter it's already reactive chlorine that's probably not gonna out gas which you might want to filter if you think there's a lot of that but I have a hunch that they that most of it is the gas and if you just simply let it sit out in the air for hours or days I'm not sure how long it'll and you can you know how you could tell just let [20:12] try letting it sit out different amounts of time and then put it into a bottle and let it sit in the bottle for a long time yeah and then open the ball and you can just smell it and you can smell down to I don't know about one part per billion or something I think the whole point is the the chlorine is actually the main culprit that's actually reacting with other organic compounds to form toxic byproducts and yes you're right when you say you can cap the product and take the top off and then the chlorine gas is released into the atmosphere but it's more what we're getting out here and I'm not saying that we shouldn't do this I'm just opening up for discussion as part of what we're covering tonight is that the the product itself chlorine produces a lot of toxic byproducts from the organic matter in the water yeah small levels of which some is extremely toxic and the chloramine is even more potent at doing that so it's even worse thank you for your call yeah so anyway so that's an experiment somebody could do about letting the water sit out different periods of time then putting it into a bottle and letting it sit around for at [21:14] least a day or two and then open the ball and see if you can smell the chlorine and see how long it needs to sit around before the the amount that you can detect with your nose all right I appreciate your call now dr. Pete you again I don't want to cut you off if you wanted to add something to that because there is another caller on the line oh well chloroform another chlorinated hydrocarbons are both volatile too so they will gas out okay all right so we have another caller here on the line whoa hi caller where you from and what's your question Fort Bragg Fort Bragg question yeah just wondered if I mean a doctor might have some information on this might not if I just wanted to add regarding that and that's what I was wondering about is the best you know filtration system for everyone you know could use right now yeah in years ago I I was in marketing of water filters at that time we had a pressed very high [22:20] quality pressed carbon block filter and that was supposed to be very good for taking out not just chlorine but the some of the organic trihella methane that are produced by having absolutely we haven't mentioned those but you're very well other pretty rough stuff you are a landing assist it would take that out yeah and I've got an answer for you but I will let dr. Pete go first because I'm be curious right and one one the thing I wanted to add is for some of who doesn't you know really can't filter all the different locations in the home that probably the best location is the shower because the body is the largest organ that's right and you can always take drinking water you know out of a shower put it in the kitchen and a glass container of some sort yeah anyway just just a couple thoughts okay good good the doctor p I'm what carbon does absorb and even destroy some of the compounds but it isn't a complete safety method okay well I wanted to add to this that we use [23:29] and I have used this ever since we first started producing extracts probably because I'm British and I knew about it but Royal Dalton is the China manufacturer in England that's produced the fine bone China for over a hundred years and they developed and patented a process by which they produce ceramic filters which go down to about two angstroms I think they're extremely fine a sub micron filter that's just the outside of it they do a five stage filter with the outside of the shell is a micro crystalline ceramic and then they have a silver like a colloidal silver permit membrane they have an activated carbon block core with an ion exchange resin part of the filter to so it takes out virtually everything that leaves the minerals in it leaves a taste of the water unchanged it's the only filter that I know of that's actually [24:31] actively endorsed by the World Health Organization not that I'm endorsing the World Health Organization as an entity because I'm actually we're going to touch on a little bit of that a little bit later but I don't want to get too political with it so the World Health Organization actually endorsed this filter for use especially in third world countries where you can literally take pond water pump it through this filter which does take at least 30 psi to get a reasonable flow from it it's not something you're probably going to do with the whole house but for a drinking water faucet as a very good way of producing excellent quality water that's completely free of Giardia all sorts of cysts it takes out viruses it binds ionically to any of those known positively charged or even negatively charged cations and anions in the water it'll take out all of the metal contaminations things like you know manganese magnet not all of that but it will take out some of those more toxic [25:32] ones so mercury and other parts of evens I think it takes out silver and that kind of thing too they pardon me they do have a whole house system too so they do but I don't think you're gonna get enough flow to get your shower turned another gentleman mentioned showers and I know there's quite a few different places that have shower heads that are filters with reported water rates flow rates and reported reduction especially of things like chlorine that are available I actually have one of my shower because I used to get such a strong chlorine smell and you get a much much less chlorine smell after using just because like 20 bucks I got it at the health food store and it screws in between my nozzle and yeah the pipe is it just a little carbon block that yep and then it starts you know I think it only lasts for a year or so probably depending on how how long or how long your showers are okay so you're listening to ask your doctor and came you to go about 91.1 FM and from now till the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in we like the [26:36] questions related to this month's subject of water quality global warming amongst other things and general government control if you like of what's going on in the health care so the number here if you live in the area is 9233911 a few outside the area there's a toll-free number 1-800-KMUD-RAD or 1-800-568-3723 so dr. Pete I did want to I did and it's I don't want to get too political but it's an interesting subject because again we're an alternative radio show it's as an alternative radio station for crying out I think the subject's definitely worth airing at the end of the day I have seen so much convincing scientific evidence to refute global warming that I think this is a subject that I would like to try and open up a little bit to get to some of the financial background behind some of the mandates that both the EPA [27:39] and the government are putting into place to basically counter the supposed carbon dioxide threat to global warming because I know and I wanted to bring this out dr. Pete because I know that you're passionately an advocate of carbon dioxide in living systems and the people that I would point the radio listeners to to go on the web and listen to this very very well educated and eloquent scientifically backed up by so many scientists around the world people that have worked with NOAA in America the North American North Atlantic Northup no NOAA is the NOAA.gov it's a North no National Oceagrantic and Atmospheric Administration sorry okay so I wanted to talk a little bit about that because it ties so many different parts of what I know you have got a lot of information on it ties in the financial corruption that there is in the world which kind [28:42] of makes medicine go in skewed directions really sometimes not following the science but following the money and I think it's a very interesting subject that needs to be opened up so that we can really hear the full debate about this I think a lot of people unfortunately go along with it because it maybe just sounds that we are such a evil species producing such a lot of evil carbon dioxide that we need to be controlled when I know that this particular person Lord Christopher Moncton who's a an English an English Lord he's actually taken this upon himself as a fairly lifetime commitment to exposing the lies about global warming and if people want to go to YouTube his name is Christopher Moncton and if you typed into a YouTube search Christopher Moncton climate change you'll see quite a number of interviews with Christopher [29:43] Moncton now he presented himself at the Paris Climate Talks he's been to the ICPP and he's came and he delivered a speech to Congress in 2013 purely because Al Gore's program documentary that he got a Nobel Prize for actually turned out to be so false and there were about 40 different statements in there that were proved to be false that the English government had to take it out of the curriculum in the schools so anyway it's interesting that there's always more than one side to any argument and whilst I won't just promote any one side the truth is always out there and I think science is always able to back it up so that's why I really appreciate what you bring to the table Dr. Peep because you're a scientist and you know people can say what they want but they don't have the evidence to back it up it's not really worth too much so the whole global warming thing your opinion on CO2 I mean do you think we could do with less CO2 in the earth than we have now do you have [30:46] much of a voice about the previous levels of CO2 and what it meant for plants and humans yeah there was the carboniferous age of when there was just tremendous lecturing and growth of vegetation because of high atmospheric carbon dioxide one of the things that got me interested in the issue of I think was 1969 that I saw the study correlating the ratio of babies head size and chest circumference to the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and this was showing evidence that brains were getting bigger as carbon dioxide the increased and there are several reasons why that would happen that the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere helps the body to retain its [31:48] proper amount of CO2 and that inhibits wasteful of lactic acid metabolism and stabilizes the nerves so that they can rest more efficiently and and so on but the I think the general trend of the warming currently the last hundred years or so is being driven by the Sun's normal cycle or as far as it can be determined on there are not only the 11-year cycles but probably a much larger cycles and several astronomers have been showing evidence that the solar constant has been increasing in recent decades enough to fully account for the planetary warming that as far as that's been established I saw from the [32:54] presentation I think it might have been part of Al Gore's presentation when he got the Nobel Prize for this that there were three main warming periods in the period 1905 till 1913 or 1914 two of them did not coincide with CO2 necessary the third one which was one of the most recent can be scientifically explained from satellite observations of decreased cloud cover and this deep creek decreased cloud cover particularly over the tropics allows solar radiation to enter and strike the earth and therefore rate re-radiate and this was actually a physical warming attribute and that actually throughout the history of known data there's actually very little evidence to support actual global warming but in fact actual cooling in the last 17 years of the earth is actually called I know they've mentioned 2010 I think is one of the warmest years on record and more evidence for global warming but I've also seen [33:56] evidence for Antarctic ice sheets increasing I've seen polar bear species increasing in number not decreasing and what really worries me is a kind of mandate that the EPA would have on carbon and how carbon taxes folks carbon taxes are politically boundary free doesn't matter how you vote or how you think politically everyone is going to pay carbon taxes and I would put out to you that this global warming would definitely conspire to increase worldwide revenue from global carbon taxation and it further worsen the plight of third world countries now it's the third world countries that need energy production whether it's from coal fire stations or other carbon sources and third world countries are going to be very much disadvantaged by this taxation the first world the industrialized nations have already gone through their [34:57] industrial growth from the benefit of coal as an example and I think this mandate is yet another mandate to keep the poor poor and to maintain the elitist position that I think people that are in big government and big corporations actually have an exercise so I'd encourage everyone to look at YouTube and to look and look at Lord Moncton's compelling evidence he speaks before several government entities he's not just out there on his own talking to the talking to the people in the church or the you know the street corner so I would encourage people to take a look at the evidence that he has because there's a large number of recognized scientists and they come from places like NOAA and other government agencies even that are saying the evidence is actually not there so I think there is another caller on the line here so let's get this next caller before we carry on with this topic hi caller you're on here hello I have two things I wanted to ask about then I want to get off the phone [35:59] sure where you from call it before I can do it first one is about carbon sequestration okay my understanding that what they do is if they're not going to cut their tree that tree holds so much carbon and it can you know one of these companies that are polluting can buy that carbon and continue to pollute and say oh but I'm paying for this carbon to be held in this tree yeah and then my other thing that I wanted to talk about was on airline travel you know everybody just went here or there or somewhere else yeah they got in an airplane yeah and they circled around and they caused all this pollution you know the very people that attended an airplane circle before it lands the very people that attended the Paris climate conference talks came in private aircraft and it's well known there's plenty of published evidence here to show these big private commercial jets that were bought in carrying various [37:00] dignitaries and leaders etc had landed on a private airfield in France and the whole thing there was an extremely extravagant and costly affair and the people that want to tell you that you should be paying carbon taxes are the very people that are going to be collecting carbon taxes from you so again think of alternatives people don't just go along with the mainstream ideology because if you don't have an alternative there will be no no there will be no change so in terms of carbon sequestration and paying to have carbon offset follow the money that's all you got to do is follow the money so I don't know is there another caller on here let's take this next call and see where it's going call you're on the airway from I'm from here southern Humboldt I guess you'll say okay I don't know it's one of the most about the money pure it's sold around here pardon can you say that again oh the multi-peer the [38:07] multi-peer water filter yes dr. Pete do you have any knowledge of the multi-peer water filter no yeah I think it's a fairly I think it's a fairly basic I think it's a carbon block filter yeah I think it's supposed to be pretty good in colors are a lot of everything yeah I think it's the carbon or the planet just moving closer to the Sun but it does I'll see how you can say that because the ratios are withdrawing nice is melting and that the overall temperature has been going up I mean this I've heard from this debate or discussion start back in the 1950s and so I know I've been paying a little attention to it in terms of the overall it is getting warmer which is actually beneficial for the people of the planet now we have had a lot to do with it every war every bomb [39:09] dropped all the fireplaces all the electromagnetic in there it's all involves well let me let me go on to say well the planet being more inhabitable for people well let me go on to say this that the EPA now has mandated a ban for 80%!o(MISSING)f wood burning stoves and boilers in seven US states so yeah dr. Pete are you aware of someone being told they couldn't burn wood in Eugene we heard that in the news or I don't know was it Eugene or was it somewhere else in Oregon I heard it was in Eugene yeah Eugene has it but for about 40 years Eugene every summer was polluted to the point that the death rate from asthma patients have peaked during the the weeks that they were burning their grass fields and took really about 40 years and what finally stopped that was a gigantic freeway pile up that killed some people who then started suing and [40:16] finally the politicians gradually over the wood burning part of it that's a slightly different to me than when you're talking about the carbon tax involves the oil okay so dr. Pete you're aware of what's going on there in Oregon um yeah the um almost everyone has stopped burning wood where it used to be very smoky the mills would burn all of their uh trimmings and and sawdust so that the timber industry was really the main source of wood burning pollution but since they cut the forests down there just isn't that much wood available for heating so I don't think that's a as much of an issue as the the absence of the forest because the forests are a major [41:18] climate stabilizing factor by absorbing and releasing water and uh reflecting the infrared and so on I thought it was quite strange that the uh two most uh controversial or the two most demonized compounds that the EPA wanted to regulate heavily uh were co2 and water vapor and both of those wrecks held by everybody it's uh I don't know I won't I won't say it's a conspiracy but I'll say it sounds like a conspiracy um I think there's a caller kind of calling in here let's just see where this next one's going well Dr. Pete while we're waiting I remember you telling me about a rainforest I don't know if it was in the south of mexico or somewhere else in south america but you said that it had been cut down and then the weather changed and then it become a desert yeah just in the last few decades I saw some of that happening I used to travel on the train [42:23] and uh first I would go through a countryside that had just been a few years before deep forested and it was rolling green hills two or three years later I would go through there and it was ricanians cut through the soil erosion 30 or 40 feet deep just in a few years and after the much of southern mexico oaxaca was deforested the climate changed so much that they were no longer able to grow corn at every season they could only get one corn crop per year rather than two or three and so the trees were actually bringing in the moisture and stabilizing the temperature um in the summer the area is cooled by the evaporation and if you don't have the [43:29] forest the temperature of the land increases very sharply in the summer causing updrafts that create intense rainfall thunderstorms rather than a cool steady even temperature all year round from the uh slow evaporation from the trees good point okay I just wanted to mention also that it's uh and we talked a little bit about the united nations america is part of the founding founding group of uh countries that form united nations um so it's now a united nation policy and now in the us united nation is dictating policy I don't know how that can be constitutional and now the cap and trade tax proposal which is seen president obama uh his epa policy shot 40 percent of coal fired power stations directly increasing energy costs to americans an example of skewed data sets providing the unnecessary means to implement this taxation which will be [44:32] unavoidable and have no effect on the target objective but which has a political advantage of decreasing funding from the majority now republican donors which are largely energy corporations and they support coal so is there a political agenda just want to put that out there again it's an alternative show and the whole subject of global warming and the cap and trade and the taxation being mandated for every man woman and child it's kind of scary so people really need to think about what it is they're voting on and what they believe in and then look at the facts and the science to make the objective decision okay there's two callers on the air so let's get these uh next next caller hi caller where where are you from hello uh i'm from madison wisconsin madison wisconsin what's your question um my first my main question was um my girlfriend has really low cholesterol and she has hashimoto's okay and i was curious if gelatin might raise the cholesterol and like in what [45:37] then how what the mechanism is for like dysbiosis and um uh disobedience okay dr p did you catch sure that it's a little bit i didn't get all of it but um uh hashimoto's usually just means low thyroid function which is um more common in women because estrogen inhibits the thyroid and low thyroid then lets estrogen rise and uh was the rest of the question about the blood count red cells well he he said that his girlfriend had low cholesterol and hashimoto's and hashimoto's yeah it's um it's it's 138 right 138 yeah and it's it's with a fasting well it's best to do a actually a non-fasting cholesterol but for a non-fasting cholesterol a good place for it to be at is around 175 sometimes intestinal irritation can affect the liver so much that it doesn't make [46:44] enough cholesterol oh yeah that was his next question as he said and how does that how is that influenced by dysbiosis um the endotoxin poisons the liver and uh lets estrogen and other toxic metabolites increase but um the liver needs available uh glucose to to produce adequate cholesterol and eating fruits especially orange juice will often bring a person's cholesterol up to normal and if if she replaces her starchy carbohydrates with the orange juice and um has about a cup of raw carrot grated raw carrot at night before she goes to bed that should help with the dysbiosis by eliminating the starches and doing the carrot salad yes i think that's the right approach okay there's two more calls let's thank you for your call i was gonna i was [47:49] gonna ask like she's kind of if we could eat her she doesn't get very hungry would gelatin help her with that with her appetite well gelatin so i could do it help her that then would it then help her flesh well well gelatin will be anti-inflammatory for the intestine and in that way it could help her liver be less irritated and thereby make more cholesterol so yeah it's probably a good thing for everybody to take dr p do you have a direct answer for the gentleman in relation to gelatin consumption to increase cholesterol exactly what sir i said there you go okay good we've got two more callers on the air thanks for your call call let's take this next caller and uh where you from uh that's me i'm from brison brison okay what's your question um doesn't it seem it would be better uh in the developing nations to encourage more as the united states should have also uh converted to several alternative powers [48:52] cure thermal solar you know uh those kind of ideas rather than just didn't give more money to some corrupted corporations yep no i i totally agree with you in california and the uh latitudes that get the sun exposure solar energy is fantastic and that should be a lot more available to people i think geothermal and water is also an option where there's plenty of uh resource for it but it doesn't make the power companies enough money what i would say is i think the whole epa mandate uh is definitely avoidable with uh good up-to-date uh filtration you know the the means exist to produce these coal-fired power stations that have zero emissions uh and i think the objective analysis is that nuclear is unfortunately the only other option and that's where we're going with what we've got going right now uh well you could also just burn the trash if you have a clean burning scrubbers or in it like you're talking about for the coal plants that you might as well just even burn trash you could [49:57] go into our van bills and mine them yeah you could separate the metals and everything out i mean those out you had a pretty good suggestion by the science officer dr levy who uh showed the whole process of how the separation even in the materials uh the metals would go out one way the glass would go out another level they you know uh trash flexor system would work pretty good too if you're going to have clean scrubbers dr p okay well thanks you're welcome thank you for your call composting is a really a viable source of of heat methane production but just uh heat right directly from the compost because i have read a couple of large municipal landfills are starting to do this with methane as a viable uh byproduct of composting all of the household refuse and Strauss creamery makes electricity from the [50:57] methane from their cows there you go all right we have another caller on now let's take this next call away from uh my name is andy kaffir i'm in garberville in garberville what's your call caller well um you know organisms only evolve tolerances to circumstances that their species evolve through and when i was in high school i studied intertidal marine biology and we would measure the temperature salinity and ph and tide pools every hour and then go out in the ocean and measure the same thing and what we found is that there's very little change in the course of a day and as a tide withdraws out in the open ocean but there's much more of a change in those things in the tide pool so the creatures that evolve in the tide pools are urie thermal and urie hailing which means wide tolerance and the creatures that evolve in the ocean are steno hailing or steno thermal so we now know that for the last 2.1 million years the range of co2 has been between 170 and 290 parts per million and we're at 400 so i hear you making a generalized case about [51:59] co2 and plants but you have to literally look at every species and every ecosystem and you have to answer the question how can all these ecosystems that evolved in that range tolerate 400 parts per million and also you have to look what's happening with west ant artica where its collapse is now unstoppable and that's probably because it has gotten up to 400 parts per million and now we're going to face 20 feet of sea level increase this century and that's unstoppable okay how can anybody say global warming is good it's not going to happen what you need to do is you need to look at the alternative validated science from lord mongton you go ahead and do that and i think you'll find some more objective answers that unfortunately i can't give you because i'm not a scientist on that subject but i can point you to that person who totally is okay we have another caller on the air what's your question away from um i am from calgary alberta and i'm wondering why people following the mcdougal program [53:00] who eat tons of starch and vegetables are able to reverse heart disease lose weight that kind of thing okay so how do you how do you know this what's the uh the evidence for it oh um well i i guess it was on the doctor's uh website his name's dr john mcdougal and he's in california right i'm not sure where he is actually i think i've had a client who who hadn't seen dr p what's your what's your objective analysis of a starchy carbohydrate rich diet curing heart heart disease um i've talked to some of his patients and i'm sure they aren't getting enough protein okay that would be a very subjective analysis okay so if we don't have too much more to add to that uh i'm afraid yeah i'm afraid we'll probably have to stop right there that's okay [54:01] thank you so much okay well thank you for listening and thank you for your call okay yeah so uh we've got here okay okay so uh i think we probably should leave that for tonight at five to eight and i want to make sure that people get um the direction is necessary to find your website dr p so thanks so much for joining us okay thank you thank you dr p okay so for those people who have uh listened to tonight's show i know sometimes the uh subjects are controversial i'm glad they're controversial against people think uh and those people that really care about any of it can always find uh an objective analysis uh from scientific research so i'd always encourage people to look at the science now like i said about global warming there are 40 points of our gore's book that have been refuted in england and they're not allowed now to be published in the curricula that was proposed for education of children concerning this part of geography now lord [55:04] monkson again not just because he's a lord and he speaks with a posh english accent that doesn't make him uh any better than those people out on the corners any better than people around the corner but he has spent his life studying this and he has drawn together eminent scientists that are not lords they're just science people they're just scientists that's all they do is science work and they're very objective in science there's no political agenda there's no financial agenda that's why science for itself is a fairly pure and altruistic uh subject so uh lord monkton is someone who you can look at uh on youtube and how do you spell monkton say again how do you spell his name it's m-o-n-c-k-t-o-n he's the uh he's a vicar of brinchley in england but anyway he's uh he's very well educated and his arguments for it are equally and oppositely uh just like a positive and negative two positive electrons repel each other or two magnet ends repel each other uh he provides the [56:08] same evidence uh to push the argument the other way so that was the first thing uh and then for those of that uh if you have called in thanks so much for taking the time to listen and contribute uh we will be doing the same show the third friday of next month i just want to let people know that uh the website that we've had which has been woefully outdated i did it in 2001 uh with adobe page mill on an old computer and it hasn't changed up until tomorrow so tomorrow the new website western botanicalmedicine.com has all of these interviews on it there's 57 radio interviews that have been edited and will be available free to download uh for anybody who wants to take the time to look at it i would encourage you to go and do that not because i need hits on the website because we cannot first time anyway when you type in western botanical medicine not looking for that just want to make sure that people know all these interviews with dr p have been recorded on a freely available uh so thanks so much for [57:08] joining us and uh we'll be here same time next month third friday the month and for those of you who want to look at dr uh dr ray p's website it's www.raypeat.com and that's r a y p e a t and he has a whole range of fully referenced uh scientific journals that are not selling anything and time and time again what he's said has been born out slowly but surely in the mainstream as a culture recognizes this change that's inevitable so uh thanks so much for listening until next month good night good night support for kmud comes from end of the lost coast in shelter cove with fireplace spa and sauna suites overlooking the ocean and views of the migrating california gray whales fish tank espresso and delgada pizza and bakery are open daily more information available at nine eight six seven five two one or online at end of the lost coast [58:10] dot com and support for kmud comes from solar winds northern lights a licensed insured bonded contractors specializing in the design installation maintenance and troubleshooting of battery based and grid tied solar electric systems also complete electrical services for homes homesteads and agriculture more information is available from chris at four nine eight two eight zero four or online at solar winds northern lights dot com it is eight o'clock this is redwood community radio kmud garberville kmue yurika k