---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Antioxidant Theory and the Continued War on Cancer
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hy5J-_oS34
  # also https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-160916-antioxidant-theory-and-continued-war-on-cancer.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hy5J-_oS34
  kind: auto-generated
  date: "2024-04-21"
  author: Whisper AI
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
# filename date from toxinless.com url. YouTube has different date

added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-21"
---
 [0:00] Welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of you who perhaps have never listened to the shows, they run every third Friday of the month from 7 to 8pm. We're both licensed medical herbalists who trained in England, graduating there with a degree in herbal medicine and we run a clinic in Garberville where we consult with clients about a wide range of conditions and recommend supplements and nutritional counseling. You're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor on KMU de Garberville, 91.1 FM and from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock, you're invited to call in with any questions, either related or unrelated to this month's subject of antioxidant theory and the continued war on cancer. The number here if you live in the area is 9233911 and there's an 800 number which is 1-800-568-3723 for those outside the area and also for those people listening on the web. So www.kmud.org and this show is streaming live so I think [1:07] many of our people that come from the midwest and the east coast are probably listening to this on the web. We can be reached incidentally toll free on 1-888-WBMURB for consultations or any further information at the end of the show and or Monday through Friday 9-5. So I wanted to open up with a little repeat or a paraphrase of some of our previous discussions with Dr. Pete both in July and in May. So US Vice President Joe Biden addresses the session Cancer Moonshot, a call to action during the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, January the 19th, 2016. Biden, whose son Beau died last year at the age of 46 from brain cancer, has helped fuel Biden's sense of urgency about the project which was first announced by President Barack Obama in his State of the Union address in [2:11] January. In July's program, we discussed your newsletter, Dr. Pete, entitled 100 Years of Cancer Metabolism, which outlined the stark contrast between the objective and scientific inquiry based approach to disease, exemplified by early 20th century biologists like Otto Warburg, Albert St. Georgie, William F. Koch, and the mechanistic, cancer-sidal approaches of the multi-billion dollar cancer industry, which has failed spectacularly to find a cure for cancer and whose funding continues to grow disproportionate to any other industry whose ability to prove good on their research funding would normally cause their exit from the marketplace. It is more a matter of continuing the war and the money generated in cancer's feared diagnosis which perpetuates the industry. Cures are really not very profitable nor self-perpetuating. Thus, misled strategies to conquer cancer prevail against the truly [3:12] objective and scientific discourses of yesteryear, with the emergence of globalistic monopolies with different objectives to truly curing anything but continuing to play both sides of the war, not unlike real wars, so waged by corrupt governments and corrupt politicians alike. The free radical theory of aging was conceived by Denim Harman in the 50s when prevailing scientific opinion held that free radicals were too unstable to exist in biological systems. Two sources inspired Harman, one was the rate of living theory which holds that the lifespan is an inverse function of metabolic rate which in turn is proportional to oxygen consumption and to Rebecca Gershman's observation that hyperbaric oxygen toxicity and radiation toxicity could be explained by the same underlying phenomenon, i.e. oxygen free radicals. Now Harman's hypothesis has been seriously challenged by recent studies showing that reactive oxygen species actually evoke metabolic health and longevity and as for Rebecca Gershman's observation [4:15] it's interesting that Joseph Priestly, the English chemist who discovered oxygen in 1774, had questioned whether the gas which is so essential to life might also in some way be harmful. Modern research has revealed that oxygen is actually a very toxic material and that the body has a number of antioxidant defense systems that act continuously to keep tissue oxygen levels from getting too high. One of the built-in systems that accomplishes this is the enzyme superoxide dismutase covered by Erwin Frilovic and Joe McCord in 67. It begets the question why the neurosis in the ICU of most hospitals, if your oxygen saturation is lower than 97%!,(MISSING) they poison you with pure oxygen when its common knowledge that increased CO2 is protective. Like the previous show in May, Dr. Peat's newsletter explained and explored the societal paranoia versus trustanoia, referring to the governments working for our benefit to keep us safe from disease, etc. Dr. Peat displayed evidence contrary to this [5:18] related to cancer therapies ignoring objective science but rather aqueousing to rank order within academia. Now Dr. Peat, you've uncovered research which shows a different perspective to our previous understanding of antioxidants and how they should actually be referred to as pro-oxidants and how that affects the organism. Thank you so much for joining us again, Dr. Peat. Hi. For those people as always who may have not listened to our show, would you outline your academic and professional background for those people listening? I appreciate that. My biology study was at the University of Oregon, 1968 to 72, where I worked on my thesis on reproductive aging and the oxidative metabolic changes that are involved in aging. And at that time I was really just bringing together information on oxidative metabolism that had [6:25] been developed over the preceding 50 years. And I thought the situation was ripe for sort of a conclusion. I, at the time, couldn't have imagined that 45 years later it would have gone backward to the 1890 situation of the government pushing a purely genetic causation of cancer and other diseases. Now Harman's hypothesis would have been relevant at that time. And you said in the 50s, early or mid 50s, you were doing this kind of post-grad work? Yeah, in the 1950s there were lots of new discoveries. Daniel Mazia and his collaborator, Katsuma Don, discovered how the mitotic apparatus works, the controlled cell division. And they [7:34] found that the reduction of the sulfur groups, the sulfhydryl, increased at the time of cell division. And if you look at those as the interface between metabolic energy production and cell growth and differentiation, it suggests a very direct course to curing the tumor producing diseases at least and the inflammatory diseases by working on metabolism. The genes are only in the background. They don't have any role in therapy, actually, except everyone has to have genes to produce proteins and everything else. Okay, we'll get into a little bit later how the gene theory has been totally discredited in a lot of ways in terms of the evidence that we'll bring out in some of these abstracts. [8:38] In terms of what interested me when I started reading these abstracts and articles was that I think a lot of people recognize the term oxidant and antioxidant probably erroneously and we've always looked at antioxidants as being the things we were necessarily looking for when, in fact, when they've done autopsies in the brain, they find things like glutathione, which is one of the main antioxidants in the system, is actually not that depleted and so they're looking at other reasons for aging and cell death, et cetera. How is your current understanding of antioxidants different? Because essentially what I think you're trying to say was that antioxidants should really be termed prooxidants. Yeah, the ones that are therapeutically useful, such as vitamin E and vitamin C, actually shift the balance inside the cell. Vitamin C is known to be in a very highly [9:46] oxidized condition, so it isn't really the vitamin C we know. It's a dehydroscorbate when it's inside the healthy cell. These are maintaining the, it's actually a constant flow of electrons, but the balance at every moment is pushed in the direction closer to oxygen and farther from the reducing electrons, and so if you're deficient in vitamin E and vitamin C and so on, the electrons predominate and shift over to reducing the sulfur groups all through the cell into the sulfhydroform promoting inflammation. And if you think about what happens when any kind of injury happens, whether it's a microbe or getting stuck with a thorn or whatever, [10:49] you disrupt the ability of the organized tissue to deliver oxygen and sugar and other nutrients to the cell. And so the cell in that area is starved, can't oxidize, and it has an immediate shift over to the basically the antioxidant side. The cell has a variety of enzymes that function as antioxidants, but they are only activated during injury or stress. And what happens to the cells in that condition is the sulfhydrals are reduced. The mitotic apparatus is activated. The cells de-differentiate, lose their functions except to grow and divide and move. So they creep into the injured area and multiply to repair the area. And then [11:57] if the surrounding organism is able to deliver oxygen and sugar and other nutrients, then they are able to differentiate and finish the healing process. So this whole theory of antioxidant that we don't want to oxidize things is whether we want the cell to be oxidizing and an injured cell is not using the oxygen. It's actually an anti-oxygen state. Yeah, and if you get stuck in the antioxidant state, that keeps the healing process from being completed and that's where cancer is. It's stuck in the inflamed antioxidant state. I was only able to divide without knowing exactly what it should be doing. So how can we understand, sorry, under, how can we understand how CoQ10 and naryngin and apigenin are actually working on the [13:02] inside of the cell? The apigenin and naryngin from like orange peel marmalade and celery seeds? And apigenin from celery seeds? Those potent antioxidants, as we're told, they're antioxidants, but how are they actually working in the cell? Well, the CoQ10 is now known to fit very specifically in the certain places in the mitochondria that deliver electrons to the electron transport system, delivering it ultimately to oxygen to complete the production of ATP and carbon dioxide. So it plugs right into the oxidative system. So it's actually oxidizing? It's oxidizing everything upstream to deliver those electrons into the oxidizing pigments which deliver the [14:03] electrons to oxygen. So it's a necessary link between oxygen and all of the reducing factors. So if you don't have that link, that's one of the essential links that you need to prevent the electrons from going into the growth cell division system. Right, because if they don't have, if the cells don't have enough oxygen, then they'll start dividing and potentially becoming cancerous if they don't get that oxygen and the oxidizing process happening. Yeah, and where the actual antioxidant function comes in is when you have an oversupply of polyunsaturated fats, for example, when you don't have enough oxygen and go into that inflamed cell division state, the electrons that can't be taken up by oxygen are free to locate on iron atoms, for example, [15:15] and the iron, when it's reduced, there's always some potential iron, but the older you are, the more free iron there is likely to be in your cells. The electrons activate the iron which then attacks any of the polyunsaturated fats in the environment and that sets up an oxygen consuming system which produces nothing of value. The electrons have no place proper to go, so they go to iron, which then gives its electron to the polyunsaturated fat, which becomes a free radical and consumes, reacts directly then sometimes with oxygen or with more iron and you get cycles of oxidation without purpose. Right, okay, so you want the oxidation to be in the cell [16:19] producing carbon dioxide using sugar and oxygen and the whole proper cellular respiration be going on not to where you're in this reduced state or your body, the poofa, the polyunsaturated fats are so hungry for oxygen and so is the iron and so those things are oxidizing and not producing, is that a good way to understand it? Yeah, and in the process of consuming oxygen, they are creating oxygen starvation and so they're setting up the situation to spread. So it's a very energy wasteful situation? Yeah, an oxygen wasting system. Is that because the polyunsaturates will attract the oxygens more strongly than the respiring cell? Yeah, they become a trap for oxygen and as they deteriorate, they interact with the iron and proteins and create imitation oxidative enzymes except as a short circuit directly between [17:24] NADH and oxygen by way of the iron and proteins that are condensed in the form of age pigment or lipophusca made up of polyunsaturated fats and parts of the cell which have been destroyed. And so those function as a very powerful oxygen sink keeping them mitochondria from getting the oxygen they need. So you don't want to, so that's why you don't want to eat fried foods that are fried in liquid vegetable oils because you're going to create an oxygen starvation for your cells that need the oxygen because the vegetable oil is going to soak it all up? Yeah, and with time as that process accumulates, for example, small amounts of practically invisible of the age pigment begin accumulating and keeping the cells in a state in which they take up [18:28] preferentially more of the polyunsaturated fats if they're available. And so with age organs like the brain which are normally very high energy users become slowed down and reduced and preferentially concentrate more and more of the highly unsaturated fats especially DHA, the predominant fat in fish oil, concentrates more and more in the brain with age and makes the brain more and more susceptible to the lipid peroxidation and losing function because the oxygen is being diverted. Yeah, and it's the byproducts of that lipid peroxidation which are themselves very damaging. Yeah, and tends to produce more of the age pigment. So what is cumulative is the [19:35] catalytic products of the degenerating polyunsaturates and not specifically mutations in the mitochondria which the Harman free radical theory of aging insisted on. Right. Okay, good. I mean, let me hold you there. You're asking, you're listening to us, you're asking Dr. K. M. D. Garberville, 91.1 FM. We're very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peep with us exploring the latest concepts in oxidants, antioxidants, cancer theory. The lines will be open from 7.30 to 8 o'clock if callers would like to call in with any questions either related to this month's subject or to other relevant subjects surrounding health. The number here for in the area is 9233911. Well, there's an 800 number for those out of state, perhaps at 800-568-3723. And Dr. Peep, yeah, it's brought up an interesting point here, lipofushkin. So I know we've mentioned it many times in the past in reference to fish oils which [20:42] unfortunately are still portrayed as being very healthful and is still a very multi-billion dollar industry for certain corporations. Obviously, these things take a long time before they reach the mainstream and people understand that what they're doing for themselves is actually very harmful. So I thought I was thinking about the link and it's a little bit of a kind of curve ball, but the outbreak of Zika, let's just explore. I haven't really prepared, I know you haven't prepared for it, but I know you've normally got a very different perspective at which to approach a problem. So in terms of Zika and the prevalence of microcephaly, if that indeed is a manifestation of Zika only, I was looking earlier on just at lipofushkin in general. I came across the term neuronal seroid lipofushkinosis. Now, seroid apparently is a product that's [21:43] produced as a result of the inability to remove lipofushkin. And there were apparently there eight types or so they've recognized these types or subtypes, genetically separate neurodegenerative disorders that result, as I said, from the excessive accumulation of the pigment lipofushkin. Now, with reference, like I said, to seroid, it apparently is formed when a disposal system for lipofushkin is overloaded. But what caught my attention was that they had eight types and types one, two, and three were associated with microcephaly. And I know that without bringing up this or changing the subject of this month's show to Zika and the political ramifications and or the conspiracy theories about Zika, in terms of microcephaly in the infantile brain developing in utero with reference to polyunsaturates and the production of lipofushkin and or the inability to remove the waste producing lipofushkinosis. How do you see [22:49] microcephaly in the kind of in the overall picture for the explanation of what Zika does to infantile children? Well, it could be a virus like that or it could be the insecticides that people absorb when they're spraying the mosquitoes that carry the virus. The insecticides are known to damage brain development. But 50 years ago with experiments in mice and then a little later in dogs, they found that in proportion to the unsaturation of the fat in the mother's diet, the brain development was retarded. The animal, the baby animals had smaller brains and were less able to learn in proportion to the amount of prenatal polyunsaturated fat they absorbed. Because isn't it true that the placenta will [23:49] try and filter out all of the polyunsaturated fat from the mother's diet? Yeah, the placenta preferentially absorbs glucose and fructose. But if the diet, if the mother happens to have low blood glucose, then more of the mother's circulating fats, as your blood sugar goes down, you liberate into the bloodstream free fatty acids. So when the mother has hypoglycemia, the placenta loses the ability to screen out the fats to some extent, where the baby should make its own brain fats purely from glucose. And those would be saturated fats, those wouldn't be polyunsaturated fats, correct? Well, primarily saturated, but then we intrinsically are able to make a series of polyunsaturated fats called the omega minus nine series. [24:57] And those are present in any healthy baby's brain, whether it's a human or a cow, or a bird or rodent, the developing brain turns sugar into saturated fats and the omega nine minus nine series. And the brain is predominantly lipid in its structure? About 50%!o(MISSING)f fat, very high fat content compared to other tissues. Okay, so another thing that came out looking at the breakdown of the different subtypes of lipofruschinosis were those that were associated positively with epilepsy, either childhood epilepsy, midlife or late life epilepsy. How do you see epilepsy in relation to polyunsaturates in the diet? Vitamin E has been proven to reduce the incidence of seizures in [26:05] lots of animal experiments. And the process of stress in a brain cell lowers the oxygen availability, triggers that reductive process causing lipid proxidation. And if your tissues are well saturated with vitamin E, that's much less likely to happen. Okay, so let's move on to a couple of other examples of the evidence that's been disproven in terms of mitochondrial energy production, mitochondrial health, the theory of aging. There are instances, well not instances, there's very well documented knowledge that parrots are very long lived compared to quail, for example, and there's a naked mole rat [27:07] which lives for 32 years compared to regular mice that live for three years. In terms of the metabolic energy of an organism to deal with insults essentially by having the energy to overcome that in the system, what do you have to say about the longevity of different species that exist even within the same species so that the parrots and the quail and the mole rat and regular mouse? What if flamingos also long lived, yeah? There are a few researchers who have surveyed a lot of different animals and found that the highly unsaturated animals in the given species don't live as long as those less highly unsaturated. [28:09] Holbert and Pamplona are two of the people who have done the most research and they find that birds in general are much less unsaturated in all their tissues than mammals and part of that is that they don't activate enzymes that extend, for example, linoleic acid in a mammal is processed to remove electrons until it can, with the addition of more carbons can become EPA or DHA, the highly unstable polyunsaturates. The birds simply don't use those enzymes to the extent that mammals do. So they can eat up polyunsaturated and it just doesn't turn into the EPA or the DHA. Yeah, so they have more of the unprocessed linoleic acid than the highly unstable [29:14] longer ones and part of that I think is because they live at a much higher body temperature than mammals. Mammals are usually some more between 90 and 100 degrees Fahrenheit and the birds generally are well over 100 degrees Fahrenheit up to as much as 110 degrees and that means that they will very quickly oxidize any of the most unstable fats if they eat something with a highly unsaturated fat. It's more likely that the fat will be used for energy rather than circulating to cause trouble. So how about the decreased problems with Poofer in the presence of higher temperature? You're saying it should just purely the higher temperature could cause Poofer to be oxidized more rapidly and therefore not within [30:18] the cell but actually within a GI tract or elsewhere? He's just saying it's not going to get stored and it will get used up for fuel right away because their metabolism is so fast. Even in a mammal at say 98 degrees it turns out that a very high proportion of the DHA breaks down even by the time it gets into the bloodstream and it's the breakdown products that act on the immune system to suppress inflammation by stopping temporarily stopping the production of prostaglandins. Okay we actually have a couple of callers so let's start in with our first caller. Caller you're on the air. Where are you from? Hello? Caller? Yeah I can hear you now. Where are you from Caller? Okay hi. Well I'm calling you from way far away. I'm calling you from Finland in Europe. [31:19] Finland? Excellent. The sun hasn't risen yet and it will not rise for another couple of hours. Well good to hear your voice from Finland all the best. What's your question for Dr. P? Well I'd like to first thank you for the show and I'd like your opinion about two very different types of devices. The first one are the so-called PEMF devices like earth pulse, delta sleep. The goal would be to induce delta sleep in a 46 year old male as myself and the second type of device I'd like your opinion on is CO2 breathing machines and CO2 bath devices. Yeah okay well the CO2 question no problem. The first one Dr. P have you heard of this device? A PEMF? No I don't know what it means. Can you call it? Can you just elaborate a little bit on the fundamentals of this? Sure. So those are I think in the PEMF there [32:26] must be E-M must be electromagnetic field. There are devices that you wear on your upper chest and they're supposed to deliver some light pulsing electromagnetic signal to induce deep sleep like delta sleep. Okay interesting. Dr. P what do you think about that E-M-F generator? About 40 years ago there was research on stimulating the brain across from one temple to the other with gentle just one or two volts and very few micro amps of current would be enough to induce those slower rhythms of the brain and improve sleep but I don't know what the present apparatus is. Do you know sir do you know what the volts are of the machine? Sure I think that [33:30] we're in a 10 now I'm not sure about the hertz and the micro and mega but something around 10 let me check. So basically the latest devices seem to have to be worn on some artery between the heart and one of the sides like the arm and I think it's something like 10 hertz or something like that but I'm not sure about the yeah I think you can vary them from 1 to 14 hertz but they recommend mostly around 10 8 or 10 hertz. 10 is a natural frequency for humans. Okay well I don't know we can expand too much on that but definitely can with the CO2 question so your main question about the CO2 was? Yeah so now I can see for example on the repeat forum [34:36] there are people doing all kinds of experiments and one of them being two basically bays or well there are breathing machines where you can regulate how much CO2 you're getting and then one gentleman even invented some kind of bath device so it's like a huge plastic balloon that you wrap around yourself and there's there's there's there's something for access to or for infusing yourself basically with CO2 and this can be worn for an hour. Yeah we've used that with our clients with injury that they wrap their injured limb in a plastic bag that they filled up with pure carbon dioxide. It certainly increases the vasodilation and give you that sense of warmth that you'd either get from CO2 gas or being in these soda waters that liberate CO2. I know Dr. Pete's got a lot to say about carbon dioxide let me let me let you say what you want to say about [35:37] CO2 Dr. Pete that you're always more eloquent. I think it was in 1908 that someone wrote an article about the medical uses of both as of treating colon inflammation but dental inflammation and such with the actual application of the gas or filling a bathtub since CO2 is heavier than air if you feel the drains on a bathtub you can just fill the bathtub with it and get in and the person said an hour in the bathtub was like a day at the beach. You could probably leave your clothes on as well wouldn't you? Yeah you don't have to take your clothes off because it instantly goes right through the clothing you can feel it as a warm sensation because it it relaxes blood vessels in the skin and we have used huge plastic bags that come up to the shoulders and you fill the bag and then get on a chair or something so you [36:42] can step in it without spilling the CO2 and and pull it up around your body without spilling it and then tighten it around the top and that will usually stay put for at least an hour and your skin gets pink and warm from the relaxing effect and it has a systemic effect it absorbs very quickly into your bloodstream and affects your blood pressure improves pumping efficiency of your heart reducing peripheral resistance in the arteries. Yeah positively associated with good health. Yeah and the increasing your CO2 lowers all of the transmitters of inflammation by shifting you out of the over reduced electronic state it suppresses lactic acid production for [37:48] example. It helps your mitochondria to use the oxygen quickly. Yeah in many different ways it activates the Krebs cycle and reduces meaningless excitation lets you produce the energy in the right way rather than an inflamed pointless way. Out of curiosity can you drink sparkling water and would that help like internally as opposed to externally? You um you tend to burp it out and lose much of it but a little bit you absorb is very helpful. I think that's one of the reasons why it's so calming on an upset stomach right soda water or yeah I think priestly was really working on carbon dioxide when he accidentally discovered oxygen. Okay good well thank you for your call caller we do have another call on yes so let's take this [38:52] next caller where you from caller hello hi where you where you from okay hi what's your question um I have a couple of questions. Hello uh oh I think you've cut her off if you can you get her back lead blaster can you hear me yeah I can hear you now okay um yeah um I've got two basic questions about the antioxidants number what I want to get clear about what's good and what's bad um coq10 is that good or not I've always heard that that was very good for your heart is that good or is that not good it's very good it is good so it's good to take coq10 uh how much do you think I've been taking a hundred hundred milligrams a day is that a good amount I don't think anyone really knows what the best amount you don't know the amount okay now what about EPA I've heard that EPA as a um you know the vitamin um uh not vitamin e but the um um you know what I'm talking about probably unsaturated or yeah um is uh is that good or bad I heard the [39:57] EPA was really good to support the heart function um yeah that's exactly the wrong kind of antioxidant it's the reductive kind that imitates stress and promotes degenerative processes so it's okay to have coq10 but not to have EPA that's correct uh and it also says that it supports your mood and is better for your brain function and you don't think that no definitely not better for your brain function no that was what we were discussing earlier and how an aging brain will have more and more of this EPA which means that your brain actually gets less oxygen and becomes more demented and more senile and what about vitamin e is that good or not yeah that's one of the main antioxidants dr pete was outlining the beginning of the show yeah along with vitamin c and vitamin k two functions with coenzyme q10 okay to deliver energy and do you think lucosamine is good for the joint which lucosamine oh um i'm doubtful about that it's [41:02] been associated with with uh changes in the pancreas like diabetes hmm okay so you're not sure about that one mm-hmm all right well thank you very much thank you thank you for questions just last month an article came out by uh sue and yin identifying EPA and dha as brain toxic fat there you go good i mean the evidence is just so overwhelming i don't know how people that listen to this show can possibly continue eating or taking this stuff anyway uh it takes a long time sometimes for people to uh come to finally uh well there's just so much mainstream media it's just like with everything other so much mainstream media telling you the EPA and dha are good for your brain okay we have another caller on the air so let's take this next caller call away from and what's your question i'm in the San Francisco Bay area hi what's your question um dr pete uh i've noticed tremendous uh results by being on your nutrition program i consult with andrew murray and um things have been wonderful and and even [42:07] better now that i'm on thyroid hormone my question is why are my eyes changing colors i noticed they were a brown another getting lighter and lighter my my guess is they might become a hazel but online a lot of people like raw vegan people on youtube are saying that their eyes change from brown to blue and i guess the lighter your eyes color is the healthier you are so my question is why is this happening and is it true that the the lighter color your eyes are the healthier you are i don't know about that but i know that um people who use prostaglandins as eye drops to treat glaucoma very often have a darkening of of the uh iris and uh that i think it's a a directly toxic effect where the like ultraviolet light darkens your skin because it's entering it and the pigment is a defensive reaction to protect you against ultraviolet light [43:09] i think the prostaglandin which is made from polyunsaturated fats is uh activating the defensive formation of pigment in the iris so i i suspect that it's good if you uh reduce your polyunsaturated fat intake and have lightening of your iris i suspect it's a corrective process well thank you very much all right thank you for your call okay we have another caller on the on the line so let's take this next caller call away from yes this is the first caller again thank you for letting me jump in line again i i had another question that came to mind um does mct oil do everything every good thing that uh that you recommend or that you say coconut oil can do from a health and metabolism point of view so dr. p medium train triglycerides do they do the same thing as coconut oil um yeah essentially they're doing the same thing of bypassing [44:15] your stored uh polyunsaturated fats and letting you oxidize more safely the saturated fats but one of the problems is that they are so mobile relative to the longer chains that they can be irritating to your stomach and the intestines so you have to take it in a good balance with other foods and that's why a lot of times these these supplements like the vitamin d is in an mct oil or the vitamin k they can be irritating on people's digestion and therefore then they can use those vitamins topically if they experience intestinal irritation from the mcts and that was another question dr. i wanted to ask you can you please describe the relation between vitamin k and coq10 is a precursor for coq10 um it um works at the same site in mitochondrion and it seems to [45:16] just act as a stabilizer or amplifier of the effect of of coenzyme q10 so it's almost like if you take vitamin k you're helping protect the coq10 that you have in your system um yeah i think vitamin e and and k both have that function of of working at the coq10 site so do you think it's necessary for someone to supplement with coq10 if they're using vitamin k oh well i wouldn't mix them even in your stomach i think it's good to take them at a different time because uh i've i've seen a reaction which uh in the uh at least in the presence of light i think it might uh cause other reactions to happen when when the vitamin e reacts with vitamin k okay we have another caller so let's take this next caller you're on the air where you're from [46:16] hi um this is um sue i'm an albion albion okay hi what's your question um i got some thyroid levels um drawn because um i do have Hashimoto's it inflamed quite a bit um and i just wanted to read them out and see because there's a t3 level t4 tfh tfh was 0.48 free t4 0.97 and the t3 was 110 nanograms per deciliter and uh uh the endocrinologist was saying to increase a thyroid medication to kind of make the thyroid go to sleep so that the inflammation would go down and i wanted to get dr pete's thoughts and i'd like to hang up unless he has a question for me sure dr pete um yeah the um keeping the tsh that's [47:22] probably a safe level but i know lots of people who keep that 0.01 and less and feel fine but um the tsh is a promoter of inflammation not only in the thyroid gland but in blood vessels bone marrow every place it's been studied it promotes inflammation and it happens to be activated by the uh stressed oxygen deprived condition of the cells so it's one of the mediators of the oxygen deficient stress condition along with estrogen plasticlandons cortisol and nitric oxide of tsh itself is an inflammation promoter so if you govern your dose by things like heart rate um a temperature yes and especially your middle [48:32] of the day temperature and resting heart rate and your appetite and and thirst and quality of sleep and uh a doctor can do the achilles reflex relaxation test to find out how your nerves and muscles are are acting uh the people have have different sensitivities to the t3 and t4 and um the tissue specific effect of either of those uh is affected by how inflamed you are generally uh so if you have a lot of polyunsaturated fat and plasticlandons circulating then a given amount of t3 isn't going to have the same local effect on the annular tissues so really this persistence of an inflamed thyroid that's where i'm feeling like i'm being strangled [49:42] may have more to do with my generalized inflammatory response yeah i think so okay thank you so much bye bye also when your low thyroid you produce a lot of antibodies to lots of things and you can also produce antibodies to your own thyroid so the part of the low thyroid condition is producing extra antibodies and those antibodies are part of a cleanup process so when you stop the inflammation uh it the antibody production will stop and then uh it'll take several months for the circulating level of the antibodies to disappear so basically to summarize to try to keep your tsh as close to zero as possible and the blood levels of free t3 and free t4 are not as indicative of a um well not a good measurement or not a good guideline to assess your thyroid function all those things Dr. Pete mentioned like your heart rate your temperature and your appetite those things are much more [50:48] accurate at diagnosing yourself and uh george cryo at the cleveland clinic in the 1970s found that uh even for most types of of thyroid cancer if you keep your tsh near zero it keeps down almost all of the recurrences of thyroid cancer okay we have another caller so let's take this next caller call away from um miranda miranda what's your question okay it's regarding magnesium supplement supplementation i take um a magnesium glycinate one in the morning and i take one in the evening and i find that it helps my nervous system in general but my one complaint is is that whenever i um do it whenever i start supplementing the magnesium i find that my belly fat um gets worse and i mean people that see me with my clothes on would say i'm just this [51:51] tall gawky guy but um underneath my belly flat is is very pronounced and if i drop the magnesium i seem to be a it doesn't seem to be quite as pronounced but i wonder i had read from another source many years ago that magnesium chloride was that didn't didn't um stoke that problem that most other especially magnesium oxide would really provoke it but um i was just wondering if um you have any thoughts on that dr. p what do you think about the magnesium glycinate as a substance that might be i've never used that one myself but um all of the forms that i've experimented with and for quite a few other people uh magnesium supplements can cause intestinal inflammation or irritation and i would guess that that's happening with an increase of [52:51] histamine nitric oxide and absorbing endotoxin and such yeah so it's not actually an increase in belly flat then call it's probably more due to a an increased bogginess or a water retention within the tissues uh that this magnesium may be uh causing that would then push your stomach further out might make you feel like you'd actually increase more fat is that what you're suggesting dr. are you suggesting that that increased inflammation could actually lay down more fat well the fat would increase over a period of many months or years but the water can increase overnight okay well i'm taking uh a prostate medication because i have a large prostate but i psa had no uh no indication that it was out of an abnormal range so i am playing with my water a bit how you i have to go to the bathroom quite a bit because i'm taking this herbal from new chapter for um for the prostate okay so are you finding benefit from it that's probably [53:58] based on uh pumpkin seed extract and sore palmetto right right yes i just have those for sure um i don't know you know it's from it's almost from not passing enough urine to passing too much going getting up too many times during the night um but it feels it feels healthier than insufficient urine flow dr. p a quick we've only got a few minutes left here at the end of the show but a quick uh a quick word on uh prosthetic hypertrophy benign prosthetic hypertrophy and uh you know urination difficulties and what your approach to that would be well the thyroid is the basic thing because it helps you make the anti-inflammatory uh pro-oxygen uh steroids uh pregnant alone progesterone dhpa and testosterone and keeps down the estrogen and when anything is is irritating your intestine increasing histamine and and other [55:04] uh anti-oxidative uh mediators uh the um inflammation spreads from your intestine through your whole pelvis uh in particular and it will cause uh the smooth muscle of the bladder wall to become hyperactive and oversensitive and and that causes frequent urination and uh lots of people uh assume that there's something wrong with their prostate when it's really uh the the uh intestine inflaming the whole urinary system right and so with uh as you were saying that if the magnesium is uh inflaming the irritation then that then the magnesium might be possibly indicated um i think so if you can get adequate magnesium if your thyroid lets your cells retain magnesium then 400 milligrams per day is easy to get from foods uh fruit [56:11] fruit juice milk uh cheese eggs meat uh seafood all of those things are very good sources of magnesium coffee yeah unfortunately a lot of those are um i'm definitely a committed vegetarian so i have uh i don't have eggs okay i don't want to work bud in there but let's let's put like this is three minutes to eight o'clock and we're going to wrap up with the show here so thank you very much for your call caller and all the calls we received yeah thank you very much and i just want to say one more thing about magnesium and thyroid doctor but you've said that when you have a thyroid deficiency you're not able to store magnesium properly and so it almost is like you have a magnesium deficiency as well um yeah and you can correct a magnesium deficiency uh if you uh go at your thyroid dosing carefully uh over a few days it helps you extract it from your ordinary diet right so you don't need to supplement such large doses yeah in the first two or three days if you're going to start a thyroid supplement sometimes [57:16] the magnesium helps you adapt more quickly to the thyroid but but usually for a vegetarian you can boil any kind of green leaves doesn't matter what kind but the magnesium comes out very quickly when you boil it just make sure to drink the water you boiled in yeah okay well thank you so much for your time i don't want to cut you off dr be it just want to make sure people know how to reach you uh so once again thanks so much for giving your time uh you're so very generous and uh we really do appreciate it for those people who have heard dr p or want to find out more about him w w w dot rey p t r a y p e a t dot com lots of articles scientifically referenced uh he really does know what he's talking about for those of you who've uh listened to the show we can also be reached toll free on one eight eight eight w b m herb monday through friday for consultations or further information my name's andrew murray my name's serger hannison murray thank you for tuning in tonight we've enjoyed your calls good night