---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Positive Thinking, Sleep, and Repair
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-180615-positive-thinking-sleep-repair.mp3
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-20"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-20"
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. From the third Friday of every month. Could you try a different mic, actually? Sure. Okay, one minute. Let me just try this one here. Number three. Let's see what number three is doing tonight. How is this one going? That sounds better, doesn't it? Okay, good. Well, thank you for tuning in. Those who have tuned in to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor, my name is Andrew Murray. As I was saying, every third Friday of the month, we do one hour. Well, we do. My wife and I, but it's just myself and has been for a little while now. Okay, so I do a radio show every third Friday of the month for one hour and it is a call in. So from 7.30 until 8 o'clock, we have the phone lines open with people asking questions related to the show. And every month, we do a different topic. Sometimes it's a continuation of a topic that may take a month or two or even three to get through. And every month has been the custom since about 2007 now. We're joined by Dr. Raymond Pete, who has very much been a mentor and a [1:04] listening ear, as well as an excellent guide for things that I thought were true once upon a time when I was at university studying herbal medicine, but which have just repeated doctrines and dogmas of professors and other professionals who were taught themselves by mainstream science in all of its splendor, but with its very apparent mistakes and repeated mistakes. So like I said, every third Friday of the month, I'm very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Pete on the phone with us. So let's just see if Dr. Pete's there with us. See you there? Yes. Okay. Well, thanks so much as always for giving your time every month like you do. I really appreciate it. I wanted just for the sake of people that have tuned in or are just tuning in for the first time who may have never heard you, if you would just give an outline of your academic and professional background so people can hear where you're coming from. My early education [2:08] was in literature, painting of general humanities, including philosophy. And then after about ten years in 1968, I went to graduate school in biology, intending to study nerve biology. And by finding that that was the most dogmatic of the biological studies I found the most empirical people in the department were working on reproductive physiology. And so I did my PhD in basically reproductive endocrinology and physiology. 1972 was when I got my PhD and I've been studying and writing and consulting since then. Yeah. Okay, good. I wanted to just quickly go back to last month and wrapping up the discussion [3:12] on the effects of progesterone and how the protect and sign up studies of flawed and how that whole thing which showed in the paper that progesterone was not effective, actually had some very bad designs in the trials and the flawed. Studies were quite apparent when you looked at the science objectively and so we gave people information about that and where to go. But I just wanted to say, and it's kind of shocked me a little bit because I don't often say these kind of things, a little bit like their reversal on coconut oil being actually good for you now and the liquid oils may actually be harmful. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists actually gave a few guidelines and I found that these were pretty stunning given a debate about sugar. They said that diet, and this was in relation to easing premenstrual syndrome and this was in relation to estrogen and progesterone, mainly estrogen supposedly being the good hormone and progesterone being the bad but we know it's the other way around. They said that [4:16] keeping blood sugar levels up with more smaller frequent meals might be helpful. So I know you've been a big proponent of keeping blood sugar up with something, whether it's liquid milk or orange juice or some liquid food or in fact a carbohydrate or sugar containing food every two hours. I thought that was pretty good and they also mentioned calcium and magnesium both found in yogurt and leafy vegetables for example and that magnesium might alleviate mood swings and physical symptoms like bloating from water attention so they're actually giving a thumbs up to sugar, magnesium and calcium which is good. Before we move on to the subject of sleep and repair, in this month's show I wanted to go over what you might be able to describe in your terms as the benefits of positive thinking and also just wanted to mention for those people that have tuned in the number to reach us is 707-923-3911 so from 7.30 [5:20] until the end of the show 8 o'clock that's the number to call with questions. So I wanted to explore the remodeling of reality which is possible from exercising the conscious mind through higher ideals, through positive affirmations and that this remodeling also benefits the physical body in terms of cell repair like sleep and that's going to be one of the topics for a larger part of this show. Now biblically the prophet spoke to the people in terms that they could relate to and they used agrarian concepts and analogies like sewing and reaping harvest and famine, pestilence and abundance and now the mind really can be viewed as a garden also and a good garden a tendency's garden so negative thoughts like doubt and feelings of inadequacy and fear are the weeds which spring up automatically in your garden, sometimes out competing the very garden of prosperity with its fruits and flowers which we all have access to with a positive mind. So universal quantum and spiritual laws govern our lives and if you think any other you're wrong. The soil [6:24] is your mind, the seed is the thought, the water is your action and the sun is your feelings. Whatever you plant in your mind and water the same will also have to grow. There are times or seasons and you've heard phrases like when the time is right or in due season for the descriptive spark which ignites the flame of action so be careful what you plant and give yourself too and positive affirmations and the cultivation of a beautiful garden of the mind benefit the organism in ways which science is just beginning to put into words as we are now ready to understand and I've said many times that we're in the age of knowledge and it is exponentially increasing. Quantum physics now explains the observer effect as best demonstrated by the double slit experiment which shows that the very act of observing interacts with the observed affecting the outcome and the same can be inferred at the mind and thoughts can and do affect conscious reality and physical health. So what comes to your mind Dr Pete [7:28] listening then to the subject of positive affirmation and that your mind is a garden do you have any thoughts on that? In between working in literature and linguistics and going back to school to study biology I had an experimental college, Blake College and my theory there was that there are deliberate attempts to plant bad seeds in a garden and my approach to education was that if you create the right environment people can approve those planted bad seeds and create themselves a fresh new way of looking at the world and we found that people who had thought they were inferior students in just four or five or six months in that environment where they were expected to be fully functioning [8:32] became fully functioning and achieved more in five or six months than the average American college graduate achieves in the whole four years and this is more of a liberal for the sake of the word being liberal. So I think that's one of the things that I think is important to me is to the subject of understanding and learning rather than just wrote memory and recapitulation of facts. Yeah because lots of bad intentions are being implanted along with the educational indoctrination that most people are getting. The attitudes they had towards students that were challenging that with some kind of new science perspective which actually wasn't new which was actually probably 80 or 100 years old but had been supplanted [9:36] if you like by the new dogma especially in genetics and this genetic determinism the whole theory of it. Yeah which was powered largely by a political ideology. Malthusianism and genetic determinism were very consciously political ideas which were then accepted into science supposedly because the funding came from the people with that political orientation. It's not a long stretch but what do you think about faith healing? Just to put it out there I haven't wrapped you with these questions. Well that's exactly analogous to what we were doing at Lake College. Healing people from the cultural disease have been given and there's a fairly recent book last 20 years I think it was published by Larry Dossi called [10:40] Words that Heal or Healing Words something like that and an older book published in Russian in 1930 and then in English 1959 Words as physiological and therapeutic factors. The word as a way to handle ideas and thoughts. In both of these cases they're treating words or thoughts as healing physiological factors. So it's exactly putting into the scientific terms that idea of faith healing. Do you think that the concept of, because I've always said and I've long believed it is true fortunately or unfortunately for some or even myself, but in terms of medicine I often find the word diagnosis is almost a kiss of death for some people. When you get a diagnosis for something and the doctors [11:44] or the scientists want to put it in terms that will help you come to terms with what it is that they're diagnosing you with. I find that when people don't actually, because I have quite a lot of contact with people who as you can imagine and obviously from your background come from an alternative background and they're not sold on mainstream medicine. They're not sold on mainstream science and they're very open minded and able to understand concepts which certainly are based in science and which maybe they haven't really heard of too much of, but it's there when they go searching for it. These people that I consult with that maybe haven't had a diagnosis that they will tell me in terms of symptoms and or other physical facts. Point me in a direction where although I'm not saying it as a diagnosis because that's not what I do, it's in terms of just generally counseling with people and recommending changes that will be positive. Those people that come with a diagnosis, I think sometimes a diagnosis is a very road [12:48] block to their improvement and when they haven't come with a diagnosis but I'm fairly sure what a diagnosis would be if they were in front of a traditional doctor, they make some pretty quick progress through change. Partly because I had the experience of my father having been diagnosed as diabetic and he had acquaintances who were dependent on injecting insulin every day and he didn't like that idea so he wasted away to, I think it was less than 100 pounds before searching in libraries. They found old books described using Brewer's yeast and for a few weeks he lived on pure Brewer's yeast and completely overcame the conversion of food to glucose in the urine and put on weight and lived 40 years, 45 years more [13:52] and that caused me to ask people how their diabetes was diagnosed and over the years that I've been doing that 40 or 50 years, I've only found two or three people who actually had a sane diagnosis in terms of what was known at the time. For example, in the 1940s it was known that excessive cortisol would create all the symptoms of diabetes, wasting away of the muscles and other tissues, turning it into glucose. As I inquired I found that the practical approach to that was simply to see if they had high blood sugar, maybe even sugar in the urine and prescribe the insulin or one of the [14:56] other treatments to lower the blood sugar. But I don't recall ever running into someone who's cortisol and prolactin and parathyroid hormone and all of the relative things in growth hormone and so on. Whether those were even considered at all in the diagnosis. As a separate subject perhaps I wasn't going to go in this direction and we don't have to go there for long, but do you definitively see diabetes as an example here of pancreatic high blood cell destruction per se in terms of you probably see the destruction in terms of a different process or do you don't define it like that even? It becomes a side effect of whatever is the stress which might be malnutrition or emotional stress overwork. Many things can cause the high cortisol [16:00] which then damages the beta cells and the mobilizing the fats from storage during stress. A lack of sleep for example creates a diabetic condition. And chronic stress including poor sleep quality leads to the hormonal situation which damages the pancreas and the fatty acids when you are treating it improperly you keep exposing the pancreas to these toxic fatty acids when it turns out that glucose when it's predominant in the blood causes regeneration from stem cells. This is a differentiation of new beta cells but when you're under stress and improperly treated your free fatty acids and cortisol come in and kill the new cells. [17:04] Let's hold it there for a moment because I think when I get into your sleep and aging newsletter I think there's reference and relevance to the question of diabetes in there. So for those people who've just tuned in or just listening to the show now from 7.30pm to 8pm we'll open the phone lines up to question Dr Pete either about this month's subject of going to be the sleep and aging and or the opening topic of positive thinking. The number to reach us is 707 923 3911. Okay so Dr Pete sleep and aging then so concerning sleep and the varying lengths one species needs compared to another do you see sleep more necessary for brain repair or restructuring in energy renewal or for tissue repair throughout the body all of it. What do you suggest as a minimum number of hours for sleeping adult? The rest of your body can't repair itself unless it has a brain in good working order but the most sensitive thing to the stress is the brain itself [18:08] but when the brain can't repair itself and impose the resting state on the rest of the organism then you get things like the chronic excess of free fatty acids and cortisol which destroy not only the pancreas but all of the other organs to different degrees. So these stress hormones directly affect sleep? Yeah when the blood sugar isn't able to produce the carbon dioxide but it should, it's wasted becomes lactic acid rather than carbon dioxide raises the pH of the cell interior creates a catabolic excited state in which the brain cells ultimately end up dying or being blocked so that they can't act even if they stay alive the in reaction to the falling oxidation [19:12] of glucose you get the rise of adrenaline which tries to activate cells provides more glucose if you have that in storage and that can remedy the situation that's why it's there the adrenaline should bring up the glucose and stop the stress reaction but if you don't have enough stored glucose then you resort to the cortisol level of stress adaptation the cortisol provides the glucose by breaking down your muscle cells and thymus skin cells turning it into glucose and if that glucose doesn't solve the problem then you get a chronic recurring stress blood sugar increased adrenaline cortisol and whole breakdown process [20:16] Okay so I think getting on to the subject of how science and scientists view the brain and in terms of its overarching control of the body and homeostasis there seems to be kind of two trains of thought where they have what they call quote unquote the cognitive scientists thinking of the brain as a computer and then other more open minded scientists looking at the brain as a kind of cybernetic control system with kind of a life obviously it's alive but kind of life of its own in terms of being an autonomous functioning unit rather than an on-off switch Norbert Weiner who invented cybernetics in the English speaking world he I would consider the probably the best information theorist [21:20] in terms of the brain and how it works as a control mechanism integrated with the metabolism of the body so it's a metabolic control system as well as an interpreter of how the body relates to its ecosystem relative to Norbert Weiner's view of the organism I think you could consider the average cognitive scientist as somewhat autistic or abstract out of reality okay moving on to the subject of energy and what I understand now through talking to you and working with others in terms of what you've always mentioned as the Achilles tendon reflex being a predominant indicator of hypothyroidism because the energy state of the cell [22:24] ultimately is charged positively rested and ready to begin an action potential and that in the tendon reflex when there's a slow return to the resting state that shows that the cell has been overstimulated and just like in sleep if we don't get enough sleep we are essentially too excited in terms of people that are insomniacs for example too excited to be able to get that relaxation so that we have that energy in the morning when we get up like we do when we're healthy and strong and we get lots of sugar in our diet and our thyroid is good and vitamin D and everything else and calcium so that we're charged and ready to go so the ability to relax and to accumulate energy and the substance of differentiation then this is a predominantly negative high energy production system and as a third [23:28] dimension of this comparing the brain to the cramping calf muscle in the Achilles reflex test if you think of the cancer cell as an energy deprived over excited cell it has the exact distribution of the fatigued or are ceasing brain cells or the cramping muscle cells deficiency of sugar or oxygen will cause cramping in the muscles insomnia or seizure in the brain and compulsive growth and diffusion in the cancer cell so this excitotoxicity would refer very well to cancer cells they're just completely excited and unable to relax ultimately apart from apoptosis and the regular cell death mechanisms by which normal cells or the body [24:32] maintains its normalcy rather than growing out of control or out of the bounds of what's needed of it Some doctors have mentioned that you could diagnose cancerous lymph nodes or armpits in relation to breast cancer just by touching them without needing to do a biopsy because it turns out that cancer cells are hardened to the same way a cramped muscle is hardened just by the touch of a cancer cell it shouldn't be hard it should be relaxed and full of energy ready to work but it's in the cramped working state but this is when they describe these things soft tumors and hard tumors don't they have a differentiation for these kind of tumors? the soft tumor is harder than that tissue is normally the hard tumors is at the stage beyond that [25:36] people want to call in about this month's topic changing and or the positive thoughts, affirmations and how that controls our reality in terms of the double slit experiment and the actual evidence of an observer effect changing the state of the observed and the whole quantum physics thing. I know it's a pretty big subject but I think it's totally open to debate in terms of supporting its tenets. The numbers 707 923 3911 do see the light flashing so I think we do have our first caller you're on the air, what's your question away from? yeah from Brooklyn and question is right on topic. About a month ago out of the blue I developed a rash on my neck inside of my forearms and underarms it's just very red and bumpy so it looks like there's a little bit of fibrosis. Never had this before [26:40] other than that have no issues, you know, 60ish and at night it wakes me up or seems to be correlated with waking up between one and two, literally only sleeping like two and a half hours, three hours, then I'm up for several hours and I go back to sleep so the comment about sleep and aging and the comment about sort of diagnosis is brought together here with this issue because I did go to dermatologist and they said oh you have this rash and they gave me a product called Tri-M Cinnolone Acetennide Cream which has precautions of allegedly reversible HPA axis suppression, manifestations of Cushing's syndrome, hyperglycemia and Glute ulceria, all of which apparently are reversible so I didn't fill it but it's been 30 days, I've tried a bunch of different things kind of like your father did with the Brewer's yeast [27:44] and the thing is still there so I was just wondering for what would say an otherwise, you know, repeat type diet which has been very positive with eyesight, you know, muscle strength, no pain in the joints, all that's good but this rash comes out of nowhere and it's literally going on a month now so it's becoming chronic which has elevated my concern so in summary I didn't take the antibiotic it provided and I'm not taking anything other than putting, you know, some aloe vera on it, somebody recommended something called Rosehip Oil which does have, you know, maybe some poofa related additives and something called you know, black human seed oil which also has Omega 6's in it, I mean 50%!b(MISSING)ut these are things I've been trying and I was just wondering whether you have any commentary on both the sleep issue and, you know, what one might do to get rid of the stress associated with this skin rash. Okay, well I know that quickly the Rosehip Oil was probably [28:48] a vitamin C component of that although you mentioned the oil was probably a polyunsensory but Dr. Pete what do you have to say about the rash that he's just described? The first thing I would do or that I do whenever I have a symptom like that is to put lots of sodium chloride get it for ice cream freezers so you can put a couple of pounds in a bathtub and about a pound of baking soda and make a slightly hyper-osmotic solution and soak in it for a while and that usually takes care of minor skin problems but some people make an application of baking soda and sodium chloride just as a soothing thing but it has much of the effect that a drug like Triamcinolone or the glucocorticoids in general which doctors love because they'll [29:52] make everything feel better even if it's making you sick in the long run. Yeah, exactly. It was definitely a band-aid approach kind of what Andrew was saying earlier. So you're saying a pound of sodium chloride, that's not salt though it's gotta say just any clean salt and standard baking soda make a fairly salty bath and soak in it for half an hour or more. Okay, so it's a pound of baking soda and a pound of sodium chloride? Something like that doesn't have to be exact but when people experiment with the solutions it can be up to two or three times as concentrated as seawater and the average seawater is about twice as concentrated as our body fluids for sodium. How about like that dry CO2 you talked about in the past, is that worth doing too? The dry CO2 bath? Well the baking soda has that function because the sodium [30:56] holds the bicarbonate in solution so it doesn't bubble out of the warm water but your body has such a high affinity for carbon dioxide that it will pull even the bicarbonate will be pulled into your body against the gradient which the body's already pretty concentrated with CO2 but bicarbonate will help to increase that and the warm water doesn't hold much gaseous carbon dioxide but it's a healing component in mineral water which is carbonated but it's a very low concentration compared to what you could get from the baking soda and a pure CO2 dry bath is instantly starts raising your body's carbon dioxide with anti-inflammatory effects. There's a good article published in the US, I think [32:00] Michigan State Medical Journal 1905 on the uses of a carbon dioxide gas bath. So is that good to do as a separate matter like for 30 minutes? I did it once and it was cold initially but then it sort of makes your skin hot which is kind of odd. Yeah because it relaxes the blood vessels and when you notice your skin getting pink that means you're fairly well saturated with it. So does it matter what you do at 10 minutes or 30 minutes or an hour? Does it matter? Is it better to do it like maybe given that I have a chronic condition like a few times every day or a couple times a day until this goes away? Yeah I think it's fine to do it an hour or more every day if you're doing something like strengthening your bones. Recent Japanese studies have tried applying it externally to the skin [33:04] for squamous cancer of the mouth and getting good results. Okay that's great. And the sleep thing about getting up between, so I get up and then like I have a carrot salad or something and take a glass of milk and then I use the red lamp and I can get back to sleep but that's a lot of work. Seems like to your point about degeneration of the brain etc. I mean my brain seems okay right now but getting a straight six hours you know with three one and a half hour cycles maybe a little bit of dreaming would be a much better thing than waking up at you know sleeping three and a half hours, waking up for two hours, then sleeping another three and a half hours to get seven or four hours to get seven and a half hours of sleep. I think the main thing that causes that age-related interrupted sleep is that things like decreased thyroid function, slow your [34:08] digestive processes and as your blood sugar falls in darkness and when you're sleeping the falling blood sugar lets you experience a toxic reaction to the whatever is in your intestine and the irritation inflammation and absorption of endotoxin and surges of serotonin from the intestine. Those get into the bloodstream, finish off your stored glycogen and wake you up with a stress reaction and so trying to have the calmest cleanest intestine possible at bedtime So does that mean having a carrot salad before bed or something? Doesn't seem like I have a stomach ache or any problems or anything I mean maybe is it always the case that it has to be the intestine? I mean I don't know I guess what do you do to prevent this? Having a carrot salad or [35:12] a good bowl of cooked mushrooms or some slightly antiseptic fiber like that in the early afternoon and then having a fairly low protein high carbohydrate supper right before bed like ice cream or a chicken broth that's very salty combination of salt and sugar right at bedtime helps to relax the intestine for a longer period. Okay well we do have another caller on the line caller I appreciate you calling in and just want to make sure we give time to other people that are lined up. For those who are listening the number here is 707-923-391-1 Dr Pete on the line. So let's take this next call caller you're on the air where are you from what's your question? Hello am I on the air? Yeah where are you from and what's your question? I'm from Arcada California. I have a question about the Brewer's Beast and the diabetes and I'll take an answer [36:16] off the air but I'm just wondering I have to give myself an insulin injection every day I'm very attracted to the idea of not having to do that but how might one well hey why does Brewer's Beast work and did Dr Pete's father just eat nothing but Brewer's Beast? How might one transition from a possibly healing Brewer's Beast diet and get off insulin or anyway that's my question just some elaboration on diabetes and Brewer's Beast. Thank you. Okay thank you I think one of the functions of Brewer's Beast is the high niacinth. Okay you need to turn your hang up the phone I think so okay go ahead Dr Pete. The high niacinth content of the Brewer's Beast is a very effective thing for lowering the free fatty acids [37:20] are the main things killing the beta cells and there are a couple of articles on glucose and diabetes on my website that described the results of a couple doctors in the late 19th century and high sugar diet but niacinth and sugar are two things that hold down the liberation of toxic free fatty acids and anything you can do to interfere with those free fatty acids which are toxic to the pancreas will help it heal. Okay good alright let's hold it there okay so unless there's no one else at the moment let's just check in with the engineer. Actually I had a question Michael from Webway calling. Can you talk a little about water and the best water and about how much water and the importance of water Dr Pete doesn't really believe in drinking water but let's ask Dr Pete [38:24] what his opinion is about water. Go ahead. If you're really thirsty water is what you need but if you're drinking milk and orange juice to get your calories and protein and calcium and so on you usually don't need any plain water because of the amount of water you're taking in to get those nutrients is usually on the order of a gallon or so. Okay there you go good alright well the lights have started flashing in the studio again so the engineers answering the call let's see if you have another caller here no okay they hang up alright so Dr Pete I just wanted to move on in terms of the sleep and aging article that you've mentioned here that the concentration of cortisol found in the blood started to increase when the light was turned off and that this darkness is a stimulus for cortisol production and now this is whether the person was asleep or not so just the pure presence of darkness obviously this is why the long winter nights are probably [39:28] very damaging for most people because they just don't get enough exposure to sunlight and showing that the stress of darkness creates an inefficient catabolic state where you start breaking yourself down and this is mainly from cortisol again in order to generate glucose and that sleep to some extent reduces the stress but you mentioned and this is again part of red light therapy and red light treatment that people use just during the daytime for things like skin conditions as you mentioned that first caller from Brooklyn perhaps the red light there but that red light itself is a electron quenching wavelength of light that the stress of darkness you know we sleep every night and this month about the article on stress sorry sleep and aging the stress of darkness is itself very damaging and you mentioned here where cortisol [40:32] rises generating free fatty acids and all those stress hormones that are very harmful to us but yet the sleep is so necessary and deep sleep especially so necessary for tissue repair and cell healing that it's a kind of double edged sword you know you get exposed to darkness whether you're sleeping or not but especially when you're asleep and your cortisol starts to rise but that red light and exposure a pre bedtime exposure to red light can mitigate a lot of this yeah the Chinese study found that it not only improved the depth of the sleep but it improved the athletic performance the next day after the good sleep following the red light treatment about 40 years ago someone experimented with putting living tissue for example a seed very self contained easy to study material [41:36] they found that if it was exposed to ultraviolet light or sunlight and then you put it in an electron spin resonance machine or paramagnetic resonance device to measure free radicals or free electrons but after the ultraviolet light exposure it kept in the machine that would show free radicals or free electrons for hours and hours without any new exposure but if they right after putting it in the machine if they shined red light on it it went quiet the red light just knocked out the free radicals immediately and experiments with gamma rays on frogs showed the same thing with a dose of gamma rays that would kill the frogs if it was followed immediately by red light exposure it quenched the excited electrons [42:40] and the frogs didn't die in the past we've talked about what we've done on red light and light in general in terms of these anti-inflammatory effects what kind of distance under the skin do you think red light will penetrate the deepest core of the body? Yeah you know when someone has their back to the sun how red their ears look or if you put a flashlight under your hand in the dark you see the red light coming right through your hand one night I let my eyes get adapted by sleeping until about four in the morning and then put a red light behind my thigh and the whole thigh was illuminated bright red colour except the bone left a shadow just like an x-ray So I wanted to carry on here with just another reference to the permanently contracted unable to [43:44] relax state of cells and this relationship to stress and in the elderly and again I'm fortunate you know I don't know about you I think you probably have very good sleep too but I've never had a problem sleeping and I sleep oh I can sleep for ten hours for sure and I wake up feeling just fine and I don't get any kind of insomnia if I wake up at all in the night I'm back to sleep in about 30 seconds and so with old people though right as people get older they talk about people needing less sleep and I think this is a bit of a misnomer I don't think people need less sleep I think people need the same amount of sleep and when they don't get it they get less relaxation so they talk about the elderly and that their hearts failing and the muscle being another typical muscle I mean although cardiac and skeletal muscle do have physiological differences they're still muscles and when the cardiac muscle can't relax just like a skeletal muscle can't relax when it's over excited and the thyroid hormone is not adequate enough to allow relaxation [44:48] fully they basically get these heart failure type pictures scenarios coming on as part of their old age and it's not at all related to their old age it's because they just don't have enough relaxation going on so how about this in terms of the elderly and the inability to relax or their insomnia and it's related to their cardiac cycle I think it's exactly the same thing the heart doesn't beat strongly because it doesn't relax fully the diastolic relaxation just isn't there as the energy production decreases and the same thing with the brain the relaxation is impaired the same way as the heart relaxation. Alright so now getting on to that revisiting rather the red light thing that you stated in your newsletter here that [45:52] if you're exposed to it at the beginning of the night it can not only improve your sleep but also the next day's performance and this was a Japanese paper that was written in 2012 so they have objectively looked at the performance of a group of people that they were studying who actually physically performed better the next day directly proportional to their red light exposure the night before. Wow yeah incredible. Okay so the number here if anyone's listening and they want to question Dr Pete is 707-923-3911 so I had a question that was posed by a person I think they wrote this question in and I wonder actually if it may have got ass last month but let me ask you again somebody who was wondering about using Pregnenolone and I think because of bad publicity or whatever else you know that they've been worried [46:56] about progesterone and Pregnenolone they've kind of put them in the same basket they've read about this subject called Pregnenolone steel where people with worn out adrenals apparently get this issue where Pregnenolone is stolen and converted into cortisol is that even possible? Oh whenever you are making cortisol you're making it from Pregnenolone ultimately and you should have a huge excess of Pregnenolone and progesterone and only make small amounts of the terminal hormones such as cortisol and estrogen as needed but the bulk of the steroids produced should be heavily in favor of Pregnenolone and progesterone because those are stabilizing materials I don't even consider those to be hormones [48:00] the only direct action that has been identified for Pregnenolone is that it helps tissues give up excess water and it allows the fascia the connective tissue to regain its normal tone and so it can when you reach the right level it can make wrinkles in your saggy neck skin disappear. Alright well let's take this next caller. Caller you're on the airway from what's your question? I'm up on Wilder Ridge I wanted to know about the red light is it like a light bulb that you have on in your bedroom or wanted you to elaborate on the red light? Well the sunlight or any incandescent light bulb has a spectrum the sunlight is the middle of the sun spectrum is yellow the middle of an incandescent light bulb spectrum is orange and [49:04] you get the full red light benefit either from sunlight or incandescent light bulbs you don't have to get rid of it except for convenience you don't want a brilliant shiny room around you if you're trying to relax and so the dim quality of bright red light it doesn't necessarily any brighter than 200 watt incandescent bulb would be but you don't need the blue and green part of the spectrum for the therapeutic effect. Those bulbs that are supposed to be like daylight are they too bright? No if you don't need the bright light during the daytime I have a 50 watt reflector bulb called an infrared bulb but it looks like an ordinary white light but it runs at a lower temperature than a standard [50:08] bright incandescent bulb so it's heavier on the red part of the spectrum. I got you. Thank you so much for your time and your effort and all your love Dr. Pete you're awesome. Okay thank you for your call caller. Thank you. So again presumably the more skin you can bear to a red light the better the absorption of the light although I'm sure to some extent whether you're wearing t-shirt or a light shirt red light will penetrate some of that. Yeah people have experimented with pigeons despite their feathers they can see the systemic effect coming through their body because the red light penetrates pretty much anything living material. Alright we have another caller so caller you're on the airway from and what's your question? New York is just related to the points just made on the pregnant alone. How do you know whether you need it? I mean you mentioned older people [51:12] and stuff I mean because I think in previous shows Dr. Pete you said you took it for a while and now you no longer take it so I'm just wondering how does one decide whether you should be taking it or not? In the 1980s when I first experimented with it a lot of younger people wanted to try it and good healthy people in their 30s and early 40s felt nothing they could take a spoonful and have absolutely no noticeable effect. But when someone was in their late 40s or early 50s and feeling hopeless and depressed even a pinch of it 15 or 20 milligrams in 15 minutes their faces would light up and they would grin and get ambitious projects going again decide not to quit their job. So when you need it it's a very vivid effect even with a small amount. Okay so you're saying that you would the trigger would be hey if you're [52:16] feeling really down but if you're not feeling really down you're doing all the other stuff and your energy is pretty steady and you're as lucky as Andrew to sleep the way he sleeps that's pretty impressive. You know then you're saying your body probably makes enough of it. Okay that's probably why you don't take it. The other thing is on water I think in one of your write ups you mentioned water earlier. Babies are 80%!w(MISSING)ater and older people are 55%!w(MISSING)ater. So I'm just wondering and I guess high metabolic rate relates to high water percentage in the body. If you're older how is it not possible if you have dropped to a much lower percentage of water that you wouldn't need more water. Maybe it's sparkling water to get the CO2. Yeah the CO2 and the ATP are the things that hold good water in the cells while squeezing out unwanted improper water. Pregnant alone,osterone, ATP and CO2 all have that effect on the cytoplasm in particular [53:20] to keep it from taking on disorganized water but making it hang on to the water that's organized and running its metabolism. So I think old people will take up a lot of metabolic water that increases their metabolic rate when they repair their mitochondria reduce the stress hormones. So you're saying there's good water and bad water hanging around your cells. Yeah healthy kids cell that contains lots of water is metabolizing intensely keeping its CO2 and its lactic acid down and the water is part of letting the cell run at a high rate and you can restore some of that metabolic [54:24] active water with those things such as progesterone pregnant alone, thyroid and carbon dioxide. Great interest. One last quick question vitamin A, D, K how do you know what ratio and how much you actually need particularly for people as you age? How do you know that and how do you get it? What's the ratio for example of A to D? Is it 5 to 1? Is it 4 to 1? I don't think there's a definite ratio because as your thyroid function increases you're able to use lots of vitamin A in making pregnant alone and progesterone. It's coordinated with thyroid hormone and cholesterol to convert cholesterol into the good hormones and if your thyroid is low then too much vitamin A interferes and lowers the thyroid function. [55:28] Can I ask you a quick question doggy? I know we've got to wrap it up here because it's just a couple of minutes on top of the hour but in terms of pregnant alone and its production or rather its conversion, cholesterol is the main building block from which these hormones are built from correct? The reason cholesterol rises with age is that things like low thyroid function and low vitamin A availability interfere with the production of pregnant alone and progesterone and so your body compensates by increasing the cholesterol and the cholesterol increase can cause your tissue production of pregnant alone and progesterone to increase up to the limit of the cell's capability governed by vitamin A and thyroid. Okay hold it there doggy, let's get the last minute or two just to let people know where they can find more of your information. Thanks for your time. Okay so [56:32] for those people who've called in, thanks for your calls, there's other people that called in, I don't think they got a chance to ask questions but thank you for trying. For those people who want to find out more about Dr Pete his website is www.repeat.com and he's got lots of articles that are fully referenced as only a post-grad student would produce a paper, so lots of references there for all the things that he's saying and that caller with the Bruiseries question and diabetes, there's a couple of good articles there on his website which go into great detail about diabetes and the dysfunction that is part of the cause. For those people who wanted a call but didn't and just listened, Dr Pete is still doing what he's doing so thank you very much Dr Pete for your tireless effort and until the third Friday of next month what with the solstice coming up here, we'll see you then.