---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Critical Thinking in Academia
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-180817-critical-thinking-in-academia.mp3
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-20"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-20"
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to this month's August 2018's edition here of Ask Your Herb Doctor. We're calling live or we're receiving people live here from 7-8pm. The show runs every 3rd Friday of the month. From 7.30pm to the end of the show at 8 o'clock, we invite callers to phone in with questions about the topic that's opened up for that month. Or if they have other questions related to Dr Pete's expertise, they're also invited to call in. Wherever possible, I'd like to stay on topic because I do get people from various forums commenting on how sometimes some people's questions seem to take the thing completely off topic. And I know people really enjoy listening to Dr Pete's wisdom and they possibly don't like too much blathering on from other questions that take up a lot of time. But anyway, it's an open society and the program is run purely with the altruistic intention of benefiting people with impartial advice and knowledge on how to find the truth in this situation in medicine. [1:10] It's not always easy. The number here if you live in the area is 9233 911 and the area code is 707. So if you'd like to call in with questions from 7.30 onwards, we'd love to hear from you. So 707 9233 911. My name's Andrew Murray and I studied a degree in herbal medicine back in England. I graduated in 98 and have been living here in California since 2000 and run a business called Western Botanical Medicine where my training in naturopathic medicine brought me to a love and appreciation of natural healing. Natural and organic, of course, to go hand in hand. And that brings me to the subject, the opening subject of tonight's discourse on critical thinking in academia with relation to trials. But what I wanted to first open up with, and I will introduce Dr. Pete here in about five minutes, once I've just finished through the opening statements of this show, related to the latest court ruling on glyphosate simplication and its cancer-causing effects that have been finally made public. [2:25] So everyone knows Monsanto probably, the big bad corporation, mega-corporation, owning the seeds and patenting the seeds, owning plant material for the first time ever back in the 90s when they genetically modified various species of very lucrative, world-consumed products like corn and soy, et cetera, et cetera, to provide to and protect the starving third world because it would provide these genetically modified plants that would do better in drought conditions and which they could heavily spray with their own branded herbicide called Roundup, of which the main ingredient was glyphosate. So I want to just open up by quoting an interdisciplinary toxicological paper published in 2013 about celiac disease, mentioning that celiac and the more common gluten intolerance being a growing problem worldwide, but especially in North America and Europe, were an estimated 5%!o(MISSING)f the population now suffers from it. [3:27] Symptoms include nausea, diarrhea, skin rashes, macrosite, anemia and depression. And it's a multifactorial disease associated with numerous nutritional deficiencies as well as reproductive issues and increased risk to thyroid disease, kidney failure and cancer. And they propose that glyphosate, the active ingredient in herbicide Roundup, is the most important causal factor in this epidemic. Fish exposed to glyphosate develop digestive problems that are reminiscent of celiac disease and celiac disease associated with imbalances in gut bacteria that can be fully explained by the known effects of glyphosate on gut bacteria. Characteristics of celiac disease point to impairment in many cytochrome P450 enzymes which are involved with detoxifying environmental toxins and as well as activating vitamin D3, catabolizing vitamin A and maintaining bio-acid production and sulfate supplies to the gut. A glyphosate is known to inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes and deficiencies in iron, cobalt, molybdenum, copper and other rare metals associated with celiac disease can be attributed to glyphosate's strong ability to chelate these elements. [4:42] Deficiencies in tryptophan, tyrosine, methionine and selenomethionine associated with celiac disease match glyphosate's known depletion of these amino acids and celiac disease patients have an increased risk to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma which has also been implicated in glyphosate exposure. Reproductive issues associated with celiac disease such as infertility, miscarriages and birth defects can also be explained by glyphosate and glyphosate residues in wheat and other crops are likely increasing recently due to the growing practice of crop desiccation just prior to the harvest. We argue that the practice of ripening sugarcane with glyphosate may explain the recent surge in kidney failure among agricultural workers in Central America as written by the authors of this paper in, as I said, the interdisciplinary toxicological report published in December 2013. And a second source stated, analysing samples from a 2017 prospective study, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, they found that human exposure to glyphosate, a chemical widely found in wheat killers, has increased approximately 500%!s(MISSING)ince the introduction of genetically modified crops like Monsanto's Roundup Ready Corn and other terminator, quote, unquote, terminator species like soy, canola, alfalfa, cotton and sorghum. [6:09] The term terminator refers not to the movie by Schwarzenegger but to the fact that these Roundup Ready varieties are sterile and so farmers are locked into purchasing the latest seed source from Monsanto holding companies instead of breeding their own. And the FDA only recently started testing for glyphosate, this is interesting, a chemical that has been used for over 40 years in food production which in and of itself is cause for suspicion and it has only been on the California Prop 65 list since 2015. But it has drawn attention to itself over several decades from plaintiffs whose occupation involved the regular administration of the chemical. And separately, FDA chemist Narong Chamkasm found over the tolerance levels of glyphosate in corn detected at 6.5 parts per million and an FDA email states the legal limit is 5 parts per million. An illegal level would normally be reported to the EPA but an FDA supervisor wrote to an EPA official that the corn was not considered an official sample. [7:17] Chamkasm found glyphosate in numerous samples of honey. Chamkasm also found glyphosate in oatmeal products. The FDA temporarily suspended testing after those findings and Chamkasm's lab was reassigned to other programs. So how does science become corrupt and how can we protect ourselves from corrupt science? So we're very pleased to have Dr. Pete with us here on the show. Dr. Pete, you there? Yes, hi. Okay, well thanks so much for joining again and for those people who perhaps have not heard of you or heard of your background to speak on these subjects, would you mind giving people an update on your previous history, your academic and research background? My biology study was academically at least was at the University of Oregon 1968-72 of biology and biochemistry, especially reproductive physiology. Since then I've been just continuing to study primarily with interest in nerve biology, reproductive physiology and especially aging and how it relates to energy production. [8:37] Okay, so I know in the past we've mentioned this, some of your confrontations as it were within academia and you've worked closely within the university institutions and you've got first hand knowledge of the chain of corruption. Would you describe your experience and detail this chain of corruption's command base and its strategy and how this begins at the academic level and travels all the way through to final product and the ideology behind it? Long before I went to the university I had been interested in many biological fields, especially radiation poisoning from the various sources, especially atomic bomb testing in the atmosphere. And as I got interested in the late 40s and all through the 50s in reading about what was available before the atomic bomb took over the field and then after the government and its atomic energy commission began controlling the publication, [9:50] I saw that anyone basically after sometime in the 1950s, anyone who was working in biology or radiation physics who told the truth had a big campaign organized against the person. One of the first researchers who studied the harmful effects of radiation and got it into the media found that x-ray and pregnant women caused the fetus to be genetically injured in a way that increased the rate of cancer. It took about 10 years for that to be somewhat recognized and decreased the radiation exposure of pregnant women. [10:55] But the government was essentially censoring everything that was published and ruining the careers of all of the researchers who spoke out against the dangers of radiation. My main concern with an apparently very bright and confident biologist and physicist who was speaking the government line was John Goffman. I considered him the ultimate incorrect mouthpiece thing for the government all through the 50s. In the 60s, suddenly he described the event. He said he was talking to a group, speaking the government line, saying that we can't intervene to stop the bomb test from exposing the public because we don't know yet whether the radiation exposures will cause. [12:11] Serious or lethal mutations that might even kill the whole population from cancer at some point. He said as he was speaking he realized that he was saying insane things, but he had been saying them for 15, 20 years at that point. But suddenly when that dawned on him that he was saying criminally insane things, he suddenly switched sides and began honest investigation of the effects of radiation on the organism. Immediately his research money was cut off. He was fired and went into private publicizing of the problems for the rest of his life. He did very good work exposing the correctness all the way back to the radiation exposure to the atomic bomb survivors in Japan. [13:20] The figures on that were completely falsified right down to recent years. The fake data has been put into the journals prominently. One of the ways that they operate is for example the radiation health journals that supposedly are scientists watching out for the public safety in exposing them to medical x-rays or nuclear power plant leakage exposure and so on. These journals all of them that I have known of were basically owned by the nuclear industry, the public health organizations that are concerned with protecting the public. These are agencies of the industry. Government nuclear industry work together to control the publication of safety information. [14:33] When I was in graduate school, our lab working on reproductive physiology, the director decided we should have a course in radiation safety in case someone was going to work on isotope studies. The whole lab went over to Oregon State University where they had a full-time radiation safety expert and he and his graduate students did presentations on what we should know about radiation dangers and safety. I have never seen a university operate at such a low level as that radiation lab did at the State University. It is considered a land-grant university and the biology department is heavily influenced by agriculture, chemistry, herbicides, insecticides and so on, but apparently the nuclear industry got to them too. [15:56] So maybe he wasn't being so safe with it making it out to be a fairly harmless substance perhaps that you shouldn't all worry about too much or? Basically yeah, taking the line that there's a threshold below which is totally safe or even beneficial. Yeah I'm surprised he didn't actually eat some in front of you just to show you how harmless it was. One of their main lines of argument is that it's in those small doses it's supposed to be good for you. The Atomic Energy Commission called their project, Project Sunshine. That sounds nice doesn't it? Okay you're listening to ask your Dr. K. M. E. D. Garberville, 91.1 FM and from 7.30 to the end of the show, people I've invited to call in the questions related or hopefully related to this month's subject of the truth within research and critical thinking. A lot of what I'm going to be asking here is based actually on Dr. Pete's recent newsletter about critical thinking where he opens up discussion on many different topics that we've brought up in the past and he's written about fairly prolifically from estrogen scandals, [17:09] the SSRI scandals, various scandals around other well-known drugs that you know whether it's Viagra through to the ADD medications which are essentially amphetamines for children. And how these things actually come to market is quite untenable but obviously it's very successful. It's untenable when you think about it like a critical thinking person but quite successful in terms of the cover-ups that are made and the people that are paid off. And Dr. Pete, so I wanted to question you specifically about several points of this which I understand you do have personal experience. I think perhaps not the donor interest side of it because you've not been a donor or received donor funding perhaps but freedom, you might mention that freedom to do research is restricted by many in the same forces that shape publication. I think people need to hear this in terms of the mechanisms by which supposedly quote-unquote respected peer-reviewed journal publications or prestigious publications at the New England Journal of Medicine or some of the other publications that people will be fairly familiar with. [18:25] How these publications come into being and the funding that is so lucrative and so seducing for both the editors and other people in charge of the publications, how if this freedom to do the research actually shapes the publication itself because of the ownership of the publication? It's the same thing, the same companies that control funding even though it might be coming from the government and taxpayers. The culture is set by the industry and the government operating in the NIH for example are conforming to the beliefs that are favorable to the industry. Gilbert Lange happened to have one person in the funding oversight branch of the NIH, his whole career depended on one person thinking that objective research should continue in the area he was working on. [19:46] But when that person retired, his funding was cut off. Same thing happened to the virus researcher, I can't think of his name right now. He was very famous as working in the retro virus field when he suggested that the HIV AIDS so-called virus might not be harmful at all. His research money was totally cut off and he was ostracized. Even in something as safe-seeming as astronomy, a famous astronomer named Halton Arp was doing various studies of galaxies. [20:48] He happened to photograph some galaxies that were obviously continuous. There was a band of matter between separate galaxies that were no breaks in line. But one galaxy showed a very different redshift from the other galaxy and you can't have a single object connected by a band of matter, one end of it going at a vast speed away from the other one. He found several of those connected galaxies with very different redshifts which essentially proved that the idea that the redshift indicates acceleration away from the viewer that that concept must be wrong because single objects had different redshifts. [22:00] So they cut off his access to the telescopes so that he couldn't ever use them again. He had to leave the country if he wanted to use the telescope again. You also mentioned things like these wars on various lucrative diseases like we've heard about the war on terror and how that's been a complete failure and the war on cancer, another complete failure. So these are basically brought to the front as a battle cry for funding being a war but they never objectively result in too much success. I can think of a number of conditions or diseases for which there's been a long time of potential time to find a cure but which nothing really has been found and which there is still seemingly endless supply of funding to promote research into its discovery into the cure. [23:03] And the people who want to wage those wars and convince the government to fund them in working in particular theories of how diseases work, whether it's heart disease and atherosclerosis, dementia or cancer, kidney disease, whatever major field they're working in, it always happens that the researchers love the line of research that happens to enrich the drug companies. They're always aiming at some solution that involves a drug that can sustain patients. Definitely they don't want a cure. The patient said at a low price they want to develop drugs to keep the customers buying. And then also the other quote here for what I know you've said is completely erroneous science. [24:09] And again I'm going to want to bring out a little later on that the information's been there and was being followed six or seven decades ago but was buried when corporations began to exert their financial clout. You mentioned the tumor specific chemotherapy, the kind of tailored tailor made personalized tumor specific chemotherapy for particular cancers and how you said that's completely ridiculous. Think of it mechanistically like that because it just does not make any scientific sense. The traditional approach to medicine, way back to the Greek, they were looking for general principles that would go wrong and be correctable. And their approaches, diet or exercise or herbs or particular drugs, these were designed to adjust the person's constitution and make their physiology go in a healthy direction rather than a sick direction. [25:25] That is still scientifically valid. It's really the only practical solution to all of these major degenerative chronic diseases. Figuring out what it is as a general problem that causes basically everyone to go down one or more of these degenerative pathways. But although it's the primary scientific problem in biology, that is constantly being attacked as unscientific. What they want is a mechanism that potentially leads to a drug, a specific drug for a specific mechanism and preferably it will be so variable and unpredictable that it will require a great diagnostic effort. [26:38] More drugs involved to diagnose the particular brand of cancer or heart disease or dementia that the person has and then a particular individually designed treatment for that. If you're actually working on the idea that the organism is intrinsically whole and healthy and that certain things are diverting it from the pathway of good health, that is where biological generality should be the basis of scientific thinking. But that competes and so it's considered pre-scientific or unscientific if you try to look at the organism as a whole and something that can be supported to make it either not get the disease or spontaneously recover from the disease. [27:51] It is 7.30 and so from now until the end of the show at 8 o'clock people that tuned in are invited to call in with questions, hopefully related to the discourse we're having about the quote unquote meaningful research that's done and the studies outcomes and how they are skewed and corrupted often but how we can find good information that is objective. And I know we have a caller on the line so let's take this first caller, caller where are you from and watch the question. My name is Sean from Buffalo. Okay John, what's your question? I actually was listening to a previous broadcast on endotoxins and memory doctor Pete talking about the incredible falsified research relating to fish oils and the seed oils back in the 50s or 40s. And that particular show spoke about endotoxins in detail and I was trying to ask a question actually about digestion for particularly as you age get over 50. [28:56] Even if you eat like cooked vegetables, highly cooked, I know you've mentioned that's okay or cooked meat and then everything else dairy which supposedly is easy to digest. My understanding is that enzymes from the foods which are typically designed to digest them are destroyed by cooking. So if your HCl or your digestive enzymes in the body are missing it seems like no matter what you do you're going to be more exposed as you age to endotoxins. I was just wondering what your view is on taking digestive enzymes or HCl or pepsin and creatic enzymes and how would you know which ones to take to try to optimize digestion which would thereby reduce or minimize the endotoxin exposure that is so prevalent particularly with age. So Dr. Pete how would you detail or I won't say diagnose but how would you know that somebody was having digestive disturbance or how would they describe that to you in such a way as may make you feel they are compromised somewhat and what's your view on digestive enzymes as a solution? [30:12] First two problems with products of the pancreatic enzymes are very much like our own enzymes and can be very effective for someone who is deficient in enzymes and stress and aging often slow down the digestive process. So they can benefit from using pancreatic enzymes however they're made from raw animal tissue you can't get the enzymes out without sterilizing it. If you sterilize it the enzymes are inactivated so you take the risk of whatever infection the animal had. There are a couple of plant enzymes papayan and bromelain which I think are pretty safe but they only digest proteins and the non-animal enzymes that digest fats and carbohydrates happen to come from a fungus and there is the risk of allergens from the fungus with those enzymes. [31:34] So I think the best approach is to keep your energy and nutrition up so that your own stomach and pancreas and intestine and liver produce the proper enzymes for digesting. And that you consider the chemistry of the plant. Some of the enzymes if you chew a raw vegetable for example or a seed or spout for example these enzymes that are released are in many cases their function is as a defensive enzyme for those enzymes. The plant doesn't want to be chewed up and it can release toxins for example if you chew up raw bean sprouts or alfalfa sprouts you can get a big burst of toxins. I think someone calculated that something like three ounces of alfalfa sprouts would release a lethal dose of cyanide if you chewed them up. [32:49] So I guess I was thinking based on studying previously that you're talking about cooked vegetables being okay so if I have root vegetables or different leaves and you cook the daylights out of them for 40 minutes and they're really soft then they become a good food right? So the issue that you're talking about I assume goes away completely and plus the poofa is taken out so that it has traditional value am I right? Yeah you can get if you process vegetables properly you can get very good nutrition out of them but cows and goats, robins are designed to do that for us and so milk and cheese are basically detoxified plant nutrition. To do that industrially it's very possible and there are people working on it but to get all of the poofa out is one problem to get the right ratio of nutrients is another problem. [34:00] Leaves for example have very good content of calcium and magnesium and other nutrients so cows can thrive on a leaf based diet because they have enzymes to detoxify the poofa. But other parts of the plant have a bad ratio of phosphate to calcium and magnesium and so you have to look at the ratio of type of fat and type of mineral. You don't want too much iron or too much phosphate or too much unsaturated fat those are pro stress pro aging chemicals. Dr P what do you think about the as we're talking about digestion and this call is wondering what can be done. In terms of the herbal pharmacopoeia using herbs like dandelion root as a collagogue is a liver stimulant to support bioproduction to emulsify fats and the bitter compounds in plants like genshin and absinthe for stimulating hydrochloric acid production as well as pepsin. [35:15] That's an extremely valuable use of herbal remedies to stimulate on genshin. The greater genshin but there's also the lesser genshin depending on how the greater genshin probably has a stronger effect. But yeah there's lots of different herbal bitters I mean some are called hot bitters some are aromatic bitters and some are pure bitters so things like absinthe even which is that wormwood which is putting drinks now is not banned anymore it's legal but essentially was a bitter to support stomach acid production. To genshin you would stimulate HCl and pepsin production in the body because you could take that plus the pep and bromelain and maybe those are the best you can do and then you just have to keep your energy up. And the aroma of food is extremely important if you don't enjoy your food or if you're anxious while you're eating it you will mess up your digestive secretions. [36:17] And keeping a stress down too correct? Yeah. Good. Let's take the next callers though because I appreciate your caller. You're called John and let's move on to the next caller. You're on the air where are you from? Hello I'm calling from Garberville. Oh okay what's your name? Mike I've got a couple of pieces of information that I've been collecting. About 15 years ago down south of San Francisco in a very exclusive electronic show I saw something called 3D computer enhanced ultrasound that showed bones perfectly without radiation. And then the other one I had for you people is the ancient Sumerians I believe they were the first to put in you know put up a writing system. They wrote about hemp root extract for epilepsy for balancing the immune system and I'm now tracing it. It is available but this never gets out there. [37:23] Oh and another one was many years ago my health was saved by ancient Tibetan acupuncture not the modern version with all the needles very few needles very effective. Good thank you for your call Mike. That's my information thank you. Dr. P have you ever heard the 3D enhanced ultrasound? I don't recall exactly but there are instruments that can for example detect cavities in teeth much better than X-rays using ultrasound and it does give you a three dimensional picture of the tooth and its insides. And a company in Washington announced that they were coming out with a technology but something has come up and they say it won't be available for a few years anyways. [38:24] Okay let's take the next caller. Caller you're on the air and what's your name away from? Hi there you can call me Guy I'm another one from Garreville I can barely hear you on the phone. Okay well Karen what's your question caller? You mentioned glyphosate earlier in your talk I wanted to talk specifically about that I've had some recent unfortunate exposure due to an employment that I had of some pretty highly concentrated stuff and once exposed what would you recommend to possibly prevent any prolonged effects from the exposure? Yeah I'm not too sure of its toxicology apparently when you look at the monograph for glyphosate it seems quote unquote readily excreted and rapidly excreted so in terms of actually protecting somebody who's been exposed to it I would imagine that any of the roots of elimination either through the urine or the theses [39:30] you know you'd imagine that increasing that digestive output sorry the output from a digestive tract if you swallowed it or you've absorbed it through your skin either through the kidneys or through the bowels supporting that would be important and then obviously my mind goes to things like liver and supportive you know for the liver things like milk thistle and chisandra other detoxifying things. Yeah you had mentioned dandelion too and that's what was. Well that was in relation to the previous call about digestion and dandelion root has traditionally been used to promote bile in the liver oil and storage in the gallbladder so that when it's needed it's released and fats can be emulsified so that's dandelion. Okay so that's not necessarily amicable. Not really no I would imagine more speeding up the process of elimination by supporting the gut and the urinary output. Okay and would that apply to would you think like most other chemical toxins like 2,4D for instance. [40:37] Yeah pretty much because essentially they have to be excreted somehow in order to rid yourself of it but unfortunately some of these things are taken up by the bone marrow or sequestered elsewhere in the system and tissues or fat especially as a quote unquote good source of these toxins and we mentioned in the past things like the polyunsaturates are readily taken up by the fat cells and release later on to cause the damage. But Dr. P, do you have any how would you want to go about it perhaps if you knew somebody had been exposed to high levels of a toxin like this what would your approach to elimination be? A lot of the insecticides and herbicides are oil soluble such as 2,4D but glyphosate luckily is water soluble but it comes in the products of round up and touchdown I think they are. They are in brush matter and what if you mix 2,4D with diesel fuel? [41:39] It's still oil soluble. Yeah but when it gets in your body it tends to stay in your brain and fat. Oh yeah. And glyphosate luckily even though it is a nerve fence bitter disruptor it luckily is not oil soluble so it leaves the body quickly but it leaves behind damage such as genetic damage, mitochondrial damage and nerve disruption. So I think if you think that you have accumulated some of the chemicals that were in round up or touchdown other than the glyphosate then things that will turn over your fat metabolism safely adding vitamin E for example protects you as you detoxify the fats. Okay. Otherwise it's a matter of keeping your energy up so you can restore the slightly injured mitochondria, nerves, kidneys whatever were affected as the glyphosate passed through. [42:52] Okay we do have. I can definitely say there has been a definite downturn in my general energy levels since being exposed. I just kind of chalk it up to well my body is fighting back but thank you for your advice. You're welcome. Vitamin E, thyroid, aspirin and some of the protective steroids like pregnenolone and DHEA and progesterone can protect against many of those environmental oil soluble toxins. Okay good. We've got two more callers who want to pose questions to you Dr. Pete. And Dr. Pete would you get a little closer to the microphone? I've been told by the engineer that your voice is very quiet and you've been turned right up to max. Let's take this next caller. Where are you from and what's your name? Hi my name is Alex and I'm calling from New Hampshire. Okay Alex what's your question? I have a question about taking thyroid hormone T3 versus T4. [43:53] I've been taking about 16 micrograms of T3 spaced out every hour up in six microgram doses and T4 in the evening. I was wondering whether if I take too much T4 would some of that get turned into reverse T3 because there's T3 present in the bloodstream? Yeah. Or is that something I really shouldn't worry about? Because I haven't been able to get my body temperatures above about 97 and a half. Okay so Dr. Pete, a person is taking six microgram doses, presumably ten of them if he's using 60 micrograms a day and he wants to know whether or not there's any issue with the T4 that he would take being turned into reverse T3. And he doesn't seem to have his body temperature responding the way it should do to thyroid hormone. Yeah it's possible. If you're under stress for example cortisol and adrenaline can shift the metabolism of T4 into reverse T3. But I would check your general nutrition, make sure you're having seafood about once a week because selenium is the most crucial nutrient for making sure you're converting T4 as needed. [45:13] Your brain and kidneys and skin, every tissue has the equipment for converting T4 to T3 but it needs selenium to do that. And then mushrooms are a good source of selenium. Do you have any others? Yeah. Yeah. Okay so that was the answer. Thank you Corla. We have another caller on the line so let's get this next caller in. Call away from and what's the question? Yes hi. I'm from the local area. Dr. Pete I was curious I asked you about a year ago to look into the monk fruit sugar and I will take my answer off the air. So what was the question? You're still asking about monk fruit sugar? Okay. So Dr. Pete have you heard anything about monk fruit sugar? Yes I read about it. I don't remember exactly what it is though. Okay. All right no problem. If anybody else would like to call in between now and 528 you're welcome and number here 707-923-3911. [46:18] Otherwise we'll carry on with where we started in the beginning of the show. As a Dr. Pete I was going to say again you've explained the things like donor interests and how the wars on various lucrative diseases have failed us and how the whole personalized tumor specific chemotherapy is such a failure. I was going to ask you here that the whole how it all happens you know how the science come to the mainstream. We know it's all about advertising. We know it's all about generating revenue and we know all about powerful interests that are certainly not going to do themselves a disservice by producing or printing damning trials that show no benefit or potential harm and then the entire Hippocratic oath which most doctors or every doctor should take and most doctors which should thoroughly believe in first do no harm should certainly be first and foremost in their minds. But obviously most doctors that are practicing want to help people but don't have the time to look into the science behind the things that they're prescribing. [47:27] And as the medical schools are indoctrinated by drug reps and the money that comes from supporting these drugs in terms of private sponsorships or gifts quote unquote to various professors in medical schools for example. All of this becomes very easily corrupted and I wanted to mention the open access movement as being a alternative to this donor funded publication machine which I think produces so much negative. In negative press really in terms of when it's uncovered from drugs that were supposedly designed to help people. Let me just ask first I think I saw the last flashing a couple of times I don't know if there are anybody else waiting for us engineer do we have any callers. Does the engineer hear me. The engineer is looking down as into space as though he can't hear anything anyway Dr. P. [48:29] The open access movement. Do you do you know much about that and do you think it's a valid institution because I did find an article by Jeffrey Bill writing in the American Association of University professors stating that the advocates of open access tell only one side of the story. And ignoring the exploitative practices and poor quality of many open access journals what do you have much feedback or much to say about open access. He Jeffrey Bill made some good points about the possible corruption of the open access by simply turning it into sort of a personal advertising thing for researchers who aren't doing anything of special value but want to go on record as having publications for the university for example. And so they they pay a publisher to publish something even though it's junk. [49:31] So you open access has it's a false it can be just just an expansion of the advertising industry but even advertising it isn't required that advertisers lie about their product sometimes they might tell the truth. And so open access is susceptible to being used as personal advertising but if you read critically you can often find very good stuff in it. The public library of science so far has had a really good record of getting novel information out to the public that would have been censored by the regular old fashioned journals. That are under controlled by the industry. All right the public library of science folks worth taking a look at if you've never heard of it. We do have two more callers here who want to ask questions so let's get them in fairly quickly here. [50:35] Next caller you're on the air. What's your name and what's your question. Where you from we'll see. Go ahead. You're on the air. Where you from and what's your question. Caller this is why I asked you to list on your phone. Three, two, one. Okay. Let's call her. Let's drop that call and make all back. So next caller you're on the air. Where you from. What's your question. Whoops. Last caller. That was probably my fault. Next caller you're on. Yeah. Hi. I had a question about living up in a high rise. And what are the health effects of that. Well I'm not too sure about any negative health effects other than. It's been reported that the number of heart attacks and strokes are higher and it's expected that it's due to the fact that you're farther away from the earth magnetic field. I would imagine the stress of living in high rise could be a cause of Dr. P. What do you. There are some good studies just within the state of New Mexico and going from I think [51:41] three thousand to five thousand in steps of a thousand feet. They saw that heart attack heart attacks and mortality from heart disease decreased with each step up in altitude. And for over a hundred years the insurance companies have known about the benefits of living in a very high altitude. Their statistics show that the cancer for example mortality is much lower as you go higher in in altitude and there are several changes. For example there's more ultraviolet light increasing your vitamin D your thyroid hormone tends to shift to the T3 active form and the lower oxygen pressure once you're adapted makes you retain carbon dioxide in your body because the exchange in your lungs oxygen [52:50] pushes carbon dioxide out of your body as it enters but high altitude the oxygen tension is much lower so you retain more CO2 which keeps yourself in the stable oxidizing condition. The higher CO2 facilitates brain oxidation so dementia is in surveys in recent years dementia is much lower at high altitude. Do you know of any benefits of living in a high rise living on the top floor of some multi story high rise? One advantage is that the stuff over your head reacts with cosmic rays. The researchers used half an inch of lead as a roof put it over rabbit cages and those rabbits very quickly miscarried were infertile and developed degenerative diseases. [53:53] They found that it was the tertiary cosmic rays caused by the high probability of a cosmic ray causing a nuclear reaction in the layer of lead. Because they were slowed down enough to stop within them or not pass right through them or? One cosmic ray would produce a shower of intense secondary and tertiary radiation which increased the toxicity the lower you are. So the nuclear industry talks about the danger of radiation flying across the country in an airplane but actually the higher you are the less toxic the radiation is because the dense atmosphere at low altitude produces more secondary and tertiary cosmic rays similar to having the half inch of lead over your head. So when you're on the bottom floor of a big building you're going to have a lot more tertiary toxic cosmic rays [54:59] and less of the high altitude high energy cosmic rays that go right through you without doing any harm. Well thanks for that explanation. There is one other caller. I don't know if this caller is really quick about his question Dr. Pete and if you've got a paragraph answer I don't mean to cut you short of course because we love hearing what you've got to say but it's three minutes too. So caller you're on the airway from what's your question? From New York. I had a skin rash. I talked to Dr. Peter Bell I think last call and he said sodium chloride bath which I've done with kosher salt and also the dry CO2. It's gone away but it actually keeps coming back and I was just wondering if there's anything else because it sounds like it might be digestion or endotoxin related and I'm just wondering other things that might be useful. I did take acidophilus cassai and remnosis in a 100 milliliter bottle with 50 billion units in a bottle but I'm just wondering you know am I on the right track? [56:02] What is it incrementally that I could do if I sort of comply with your regular diet recommendations? Vitamin D and thyroid are the most important things I know of for skin problems. Okay and would you have to take A and D together right? Not necessarily you don't want to overdo the vitamin A but the vitamin D works both on the intestine to control the endotoxin and the skin reaction. There's no serious interaction between vitamin D and vitamin A but they're both important for the skin. I'm afraid we're going to have to catch a short Dr Pete. Thanks so much for your time and for those people who've heard Dr Pete this evening maybe for the first time go visit his website. It's www.raypeat.com. He's got lots of articles written about many different diseases, conditions, etc. [57:07] All fully referenced and he's got his unique perspective on it which comes from objectively looking at research and not just buying in to the mainstream and he's been that way for the last 50 years folks. So a lot of what he said is being born out now and will continue to be born out as the web based archives of this show and all the others that we've done over the last 10 years are there. So thanks for your time. People calling in appreciate you. Dr Pete as always thank you and until the third Friday of next month my name is Andrew Murray.