---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Skin Cancer Part 2
  url: https://www.selftestable.com/kmud-181221-skin-cancer-2.mp3
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-21"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-21"
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. Just very quickly, it's the winterous solstice here, December 21st, 2018, and we've got a full moon and an ursid meteor shower. Pretty cool, huh? Okay, so beautiful, clear evening outside, and at that time of the year, when we have the shortest days, we can look forward to increasing day length from here within a couple of days or so. So, every third Friday of the month, I guess I think for the last 14 or 15 years, I was thinking about it on the way in, we've done this monthly show, which is a live show broadcasted from the KMUD studio in Garberville, in Redway, sorry, not Garberville, in Redway, California, and every third Friday of the month, we decide on a topic based on medicine, herbal medicine, alternative medicine, nutrition, dietary advice, etc., [1:03] which we believe is a good alternative to standard medical practice, but which we still recognize medical practice as not being out of the question and certainly has a lot of benefits. It's just that some of it is very questionable. We've been very lucky to have been joined for the last 10 years now, I think, by Dr. Raymond Pete, who's a research endocrinologist, a scientist in the true sense of the word, very much involved in real research. I just want to say that when people say they've been researching something recently, I typically mean they've been looking at the internet and googling it and getting information wherever they can. I think in the empirical sense of the word, research really involves digging into a lot of literature, a lot of documents, and scientifically analyzing the data for congruence or obvious mistakes. [2:05] I know Dr. Pete has spent the last 45 years or more after his PhD doing a continued research post-PhD, post-doctorate in nutrition, health, and how to really help yourself using very simple methods. He doesn't advocate anything that's super expensive. It's really very common sense, and I think in a lot of ways the best help is to avoid some of the things that we're told is good for us, rather than adding more things into our diet. Without further ado, let me just introduce Dr. Pete. You there, Dr. Pete? Yes. Hi, well thanks so much for joining us again. As always, for the benefit of those people who perhaps have never heard you before, or heard of you or tuned in, as we're always getting new listeners and emails from people that say they just came across it for the first time, would you just outline your academic background to where you are now before we get into the night show? First, in the 1950s and early 1960s, I was studying literature and painting mostly. [3:11] Then, 1968 to 72, I did a graduate program for a PhD in biology. Talking about research, my approach to research probably is influenced by my literature background, thinking of propaganda analysis, sensitivity to how people use language and manipulate preconceptions and such. Good point. I think everyone looking at the internet has to spend more time thinking about propaganda analysis and how advertising has invaded the medical journals, practically taking over many of the journals. Absolutely. Now, it's a lot of money involved and we do mention this many times. So Dr. Pete, just very quickly, your specialty, let me not put words in your mouth, I think I know, but just tell people what your specialism was, [4:14] what it came to be when you graduated, what you looked at in research and where you're at now. My dissertation was on the biochemical changes involved in reproductive aging, working on the hamster users mostly and seeing how many factors parallel aging in the biochemical pattern that they create. Estrogen excess, progesterone deficiency, vitamin E deficiency, exposure to radiation all create the same typical age pattern of metabolism and it's at its most extreme in cancer metabolism. And that was why I was so interested in Otto Warburg's work at the time [5:17] when I was just starting in graduate school. American biochemists were turning against Otto Warburg despite his Nobel Prize because he was saying that cancer is a metabolic condition, not a gene mutation. And now 50 years later, finally the US and European cultures are coming around to looking at what Warburg did almost 100 years ago. Okay, good. So let me just tell people here that it's a live call-in show from 7.30 to 8.00. We'll take callers with questions hopefully related to this month's subject or continuing subject of skin cancer with some parallels with vitamin D and a little follow-up on the cholesterol lowering statins. We all know how bad they are for us, don't we? [6:18] So the number if you live in the area or even if you're outside the area now, 707-923-3911. So from 7.30 to 8.00 we'll be taking callers who want to ask Dr. Pete questions about the subject what we're talking about or if they have any other subjects relevant to alternative medicine or indeed his protocols number again 707-923-3911. So Dr. Pete, I wanted to continue last month's. I had questions that I never did get a chance to ask you because we had so many people calling in. But rather than just carrying straight off the questions, I wanted to make sure that I got some coverage for what was later revealed to me about an Italian MD by the name of Tulio Simoncini. So he's an MD. He's been practicing for some time although there's been controversy about him. He's one of these doctors who essentially became quite alternative in his treatment [7:24] and was struck off the medical register in the end. So people can read about him and make your own mind up. But I wanted to let people know in relation to the context of skin cancer what he had been working with and doing to treat people and by all accounts was getting very successful results with people both with topical cancers which we were covering and we're going to cover last month but we're hopefully going to cover this month. So the topical cancers from the basal cell carcinomas to the squamous cell carcinomas, actinic keratosis, malignant melanomas and he also treats internal cancers with a different protocol. So I wanted to just talk a little bit about the treatment that he was advocating with people using a 7%!i(MISSING)odine solution for topical cancers. [8:29] I think the other thing that's quite interesting is that a 7%!s(MISSING)olution for some reason is really not offered by very many people. It seems like the average concentration is between 2 and 5. There's something different I guess because the concentration is 7%!a(MISSING)nd not 2 or 5 but there's something different about people that are selling this. There's very few people doing it at 7%!a(MISSING)nd if you look at the reviews folks, you don't have to take my word for it but if you go to Amazon, the beam off that sells just about everything to anybody at any time and look at 7%!i(MISSING)odine and then check the reviews from the people that have used it for skin cancers. And I wanted to ask Dr. P his opinions about cancers and the treatment, current therapies including the Moe's therapy which is a therapy where they take successive layers of the tumour away and dissect them and basically go deeper and deeper until everything is being taken away [9:33] and then they stitch you up if you need it and everything is just fine and dandy. I know Dr. P doesn't really believe in cutting any kind of cancer and he's got his own reasons and we're asking about that. But what do you think about Tulio Simanchini's approach to cancers and his rationale that candida albicans which we probably all heard of which is that yeast overgrowth that most people can actually have candida anyway but very few people really get a bad case of it because most immune systems are able to deal with it so some people have it in their mouth or under their armpits or in between their toes but he's stated categorically that cancer is actually based in a yeast and candida albicans is essentially the organism responsible for it. So Dr. P do you have anything to put in about that in terms of being a tenable position? [10:38] About 40 years ago there was a big mania in the US blaming everything on candida and that led me to study how it actually interacts and if you're under stress and hypothyroid and inclined towards diabetes or not being able to oxidize glucose thoroughly and tending to have high estrogen happens that all of those favor and attract candida growth and so the presence of candida coincides with hypothyroidism, estrogen excess and poor ability to oxidize glucose so it happens that inflammation and improper oxidation of glucose [11:39] is typical of cancer metabolism more intensely than of simple stress metabolism so he's a simontaneous seeing something very central to the metabolism of cancer which is intensified by the inflammation promoting effects of the candida and candida itself besides being attracted to estrogen estrogen is a sex hormone for the candida fungus and it contains an enzyme which can aromatize male steroid hormones so it can become an amplifier of estrogen first it's attracted to it and stimulated by it it can convert testosterone into... yeah at least one of the precursor of steroids from the adrenal rather than from the gonads [12:49] so it's definitely in many ways an amplifier of cancer once it gets in a tissue and when the immune system is failing the fungus can convert from a yeast form to a filament form and invade the tissues looking for sugar and estrogen so it's very commonly associated with cancers the sicker a person is the weaker their immune system is and the less they are using their own glucose and they're producing themselves histamine and lactic acid in the tumor and both of these are attractive to the fungus and so if you simply increase the pH and do it with bicarbonate which converts to carbon dioxide [13:59] that helps to suppress the cancer promoting lactic acid formation by the tumor itself so he's really on to something and his critics really most of them sound sort of nasty and hysterical okay well there's a couple of things I want to pull out from what you've said here I guess number one last month we talked about vitamin D deficiency and reports say that up to a billion people on the planet are vitamin D deficient and they're increasingly raising the vitamin D levels to reflect what would actually be a good level of vitamin D because they find now that it's so important in immune function and last month you mentioned something about the skin's immune system and the deficiency of vitamin D in the skin of people especially as they get older and so that vitamin D deficiency, localized deficiency there would also play a part in [15:02] formation of a skin cancer to allow it to be outside of the body's surveillance I mean yeah and that follows from a cholesterol deficiency with age yeah that was it the ability to make cholesterol and the steroids goes down and so when the sunlight hits old skin it makes much less vitamin D just a few months ago in Poland there was an interesting article on the so-called activated form of vitamin D calcium triol for 1,25 hydroxy vitamin D and they showed that it helps that vitamin D form, the active so-called form suppresses immunity and creates the ideal environment for causing memory gland cancer metastasis [16:06] wow so hang on you're saying the one and again this was going to be another question that I had for you but so now it's probably a good time to ask you that you're saying the one alpha 25 dihydroxy vitamin D is not actually the beneficial form but that is the form in which people would use vitamin D is it not? no that's produced under stress it's sort of the way the steroid hormones under extreme stress can emphasize the estrogen version of the steroid the calcium triol is the extreme stress form of vitamin D it has its use under stress but like estrogen it easily becomes counterproductive and in the case of cancer can promote the cancer spread okay so I think probably what I meant to say was that the calcium triol is the end of the metabolic pathway for production of vitamin D [17:10] yeah and when you're well supplied with calcium and vitamin D precursors or sunlight and cholesterol you have a very low level of calcium triol okay okay got it all right so this again okay so the one alpha 25 dihydroxy is not what you want not what you want even though it's the end of the metabolic pathway but that won't be reached if you have adequate levels of thyroid and what the other thing you mentioned here calcium yeah like pregnenol is the precursor of the pathway that at its end point leads to estrogen and aldosterone and other end steroids but if you take enough pregnenol and you'll reduce those end products rather than increasing them right okay good okay you're listening to ask your own doctor on KMUD Galvival 91.1 FM [18:12] from 730 until the end of the show people are invited to call in with questions about this month's subject of skin cancer and indeed cancer metabolism per se and the number here is 707-923-3911 so from 730 to the end of the show 8 o'clock you're invited to call in so Dr. Pete Tulio Simonsini you say that he's onto something in his understanding or his positing this idea that the candida albicans is actually the culprit here behind cancers he actually shows on a couple of there's a few YouTubes of him if people want to go to YouTube and type in Tulio Simonsini his name is T-U-L-L-I-O Simon S-I-M-O-N-C-I-N-I there's a couple of YouTubes where he's showing he's basic because he's an MD he's working with oncologists in fact I think he was an oncologist and that's how he got to be so opposed to the method or the methodology [19:16] used in oncology to treat cancers and he saw that tumors invariably had white centers to them white patches, white growths and that this was candida albicans and I think you've mentioned that candida is a very opportunistic infection and actually will be very very quick to take residents in locations where it's not normally allowed to be in and in the past when I talked to you about candida you've said that really and this is again I think poor misinformation from maybe the internet or word of mouth repeating the same mistake but you do not want to starve the body of sugar which is typically what they say for candida and that is I think you've explained that quote me if I'm wrong but that the filamentous form is initiated when the fungal organism is actually deprived of sugar and it wants to go further into the tissues to pull more sugar out yes if it's happy in the intestine it grows in the yeast form having enough sugar but when there's no sugar in the intestine [20:23] and it starves then it will attach itself to the surface of the intestine and then send out filaments to fight sugar from the bloodstream or the cells okay so that was a little bit of the overview of that doctor's approach to topical skin cancers was using a 7%!i(MISSING)odine solution like I said people want to go to Amazon look at 7%!i(MISSING)odine and read the customer reviews they're all positive and they all talk about how they had basal or squamous cell carcinomas and they've gone you know given the next amount of weeks of treatment with iodine it's gone other people obviously with things like fungal situations, fungal nail or you know stubborn athletes foot etc say much the same thing I just wanted to talk a little bit about Simon Sini's work using intravenous injectable sodium bicarbonate I know you're quite a big fan of sodium bicarbonate and CO2 and the whole concept of bicarbonate [21:30] and how it's helpful not just in the context of being an alkalinizer because I know you're not really on the acid alkaline bandwagon as it were but you've got a much more scientific approach to the basis for alkalinizing or indeed how possible that is to change your pH systemically but locally I think for injecting that product around or into solid tumors is what Simon Sini's been working with when the body when bicarbonate gets into the bloodstream the sodium leaves in the urine and the bicarbonate is converted to carbon dioxide as it enters the cell and so it acidifies the intracellular environment despite increasing the alkalinity temporarily of the bloodstream and the typical cancer metabolism has an alkaline intracellular pH [22:37] and so you're getting right at the heart of the problem when you increase the CO2 inside the cell since the 18th century carbon dioxide gas has been used to treat visible cancers such as ulcerated breast cancer and the Japanese are currently using it to treat cancers using that same principle but it acidifies the cell turns off the growth mechanism of the production of lactic acid and several drug companies are working on enzyme inhibitors similar to acetazolamide but things that they can patent to increase the internal acidity of cancers just for the folks who don't know about it acetazolamide is something that you've said is useful for raising your own production of CO2 [23:42] and if you're going to elevation or something like that can help you get ready for it yeah it causes the body to retain it and acidifies the whole body when you get a certain amount but intracellular acidification turns off lactic acid production and lactic acid is the main carcinogen effectively got it because it's an energy depleter correct? mm-hmm okay well you know we do have actually got a caller on the line here has been waiting for five minutes or so so let me just firstly say people want to call in from 7.30 to the end of the show the number 707-923-3911 so caller you're on the air what's your question and where are you from? well I'm from Petroleum I guess you might have answered my question because I have the crusty carcinoma skin cancer type of thing on my hand back in my hands and the side of my neck and I was wondering about what I could do to get rid of the scab or the crust on it [24:46] and now you're telling me a 7%!s(MISSING)olution of iodine might be the solution yeah yeah if you if you go to Amazon type in 7%!i(MISSING)odine read the customer reviews about it and then if you want type in that doctor's name Giulio Simoncini is an Italian MD like I said at the beginning of the show he has actually been struck off the register because they've you know invariably called him a quack doing what he's doing even though he has a lot of testimonials from people that have gotten over cancer both skin cancers and solid tumors that were previously inoperable so it's again it's one of those one of those paradoxes where there's somebody who's saying that something actually is very possible here and he's being disavowed by the medical association because what he's doing is not in medical regular medical practice so you can go ahead and search for those two things I look up the name Julio Gamolini no Julio begins with a T so T-U-L-L-I-O and his last name is Simon C-I-N-I [25:56] Julio Simon C-I-N-I-O and then he'll cover you can read you know what people that are supporting his rationale are talking about but 7%!o(MISSING)f the idea has been used for some time here for topical skin cancers great okay well thank you very much I enjoy your show yeah you're welcome okay so we do have one more caller I think on the line okay with two more okay so caller you're on the air what's your question where you from my name is Peter I'm from San Francisco hey Peter what's your question I have a question about hypertonic liquids I've noticed a benefit from adding sugar to milk I mean milk sugar to milk in orange juice and I'm just wondering what the mechanism is for that why that works talk to me hypotonic liquids hitting the stomach and intestine cause a stress reaction and release [26:59] among other things serotonin into the bloodstream and hypertonic things if they're within reason you can injure your stomach with like a big dose of salt or dry sugar it has a dehydrating influence but if it's a moderate hypertonicity it has an anti-inflammatory effect helps to regulate energy production pH and its various hypertonic solutions are being used in resuscitation now rather than just increasing the blood volume with isotonic saline or glucose they use three or four or five times isotonic concentrations and a small volume like a cup full of a hypertonic solution [28:02] has a very intense resuscitating effect in shock great thank you alright thanks for your call caller okay I think we have one or two more so next caller you're on the air what's your question away from yeah hi my name is Durkin from Redway okay there's a question hi yeah well um my grandmother 96 year old um sedentary um indoor a lot I was just wondering if she might suffer from vitamin D deficiency um she had a squamous cell in her nose um persistent from the scab that would fluff off um and you know it was bothering her cause a lot of itching and uh you know the excite thing was the doctor's recommendation opted against that because it removed her entire nose practically so um reply cannabis oil in a olive oil suspension okay and then two weeks it went away so I'm wondering if you have any comments about the possible efficacy of the cannabis or was it the olive oil that did it I mean do you have any you know [29:04] okay well the idea is about that yeah let's ask dr. peak I know you've got certain opinions about cannabis cannabis or and or the olive oil um yeah I'm inclined to think it's the olive oil that's therapeutic because it has so many anti-inflammatory effects where I think the cannabis oil has some potentially pro growth pro inflammatory components or effects do you think that's the oleanolic component of the olive oil or do you do you think there's any one thing about it um the um the things related to the uh cannabis the characteristic uh what are they called the endogenous cannabinoids um anandamide I think is the endogenous one [30:09] it is a metabolite of a very unsaturated fatty acid and the um effects that I've seen really are along the line of the polyunsaturated fatty acids themselves as a group at our amplifiers of the estrogen effect so not not positive at all but you think the components within olive oil could well be beneficial yeah there are there are several things in it that I think can have a protective anti-cancer effect within two within two weeks the tumor completely vanished good that's yeah that's the main thing all right thanks for your question we've got a couple more callers on here so uh people want to call in like I said from now until the end of the show the number 707-923-3911 Dr. Raymond Pete's our guest uh skin cancer is the topic of this evening so caller you're on the air where are you from what's your question um New York um two questions on on the topic [31:13] first on vitamin D you mentioned poofa and fish contain a lot of poofa but not as bad as seed oils um what about like sardines because it's like a whole it's a whole fish so you're getting a lot of different type of minerals and also it seems like it's a pretty good source for vitamin D as well and perhaps bioavailable um versus taking a pill which you know I know you mentioned cholesterol and sunlight but there might might be other vitamins or other minerals that might be needed within the body to actually absorb that vitamin D I'm just thinking those might be available if you eat like a whole sardine so trying to figure out whether the poofa and sardines is is closer to halibut because I know you mentioned halibut is a pretty good one that's one question and the second one is related to the earlier comment that was mentioned on candida albicans if you have like fungal toe I know I'll look up this this Tuleo MD [32:19] but Dr. P what would you uh say to someone um that they have to be really healthy to try to attack fungal toe given the comment that it could spread to another area and be more problematic in the body if you chase it out of your toe um or how do you approach something like that so those are my questions thanks for questions so Dr. P first question about sardines how do you rate sardines uh the calcium content maybe from all the bones should probably beneficial but what do you think about sardines I have very good general nutritional value including selenium and iodine and other trace minerals that all of the ocean organisms have but it does have a lot of the polyunsaturated so I think maybe one meal a week is fine okay and then uh do you actually I was asked about the vitages is it also a good source of vitamin D or not I don't know how much but everything that is exposed to sunlight tends to have some of it [33:25] oh okay and then what's the what's your other rationale for as the caller says chasing fungal organisms out from the nail bed by treating them into other areas is that even a possibility no I don't think that would happen if you're using something like seven percent iodine on the infected nail it takes a long time to diffuse through a toenail but it is a good fungus killer okay good all right well thanks for your call caller we've got a couple more callers on the air so let's get this next caller call away from what's your question hi I'm from the San Francisco Bay Area hey welcome hi I have a question not related to the topic I was um it's a question about relationships I was in a very toxic relationship this year and found out that there is substance abuse which led to a lot of the lying and manipulation and unfortunately cheating which um ultimately ended the relationship and I'm curious Dr. Pete [34:27] um how bad relationships how do they affect individuals and can they affect one's physiology um obviously when they're stressed involved it's a very powerful stressor right I was just eating well can help to upset the stress but the attitude the way you interpret the experience is also essential to see it as just one of the challenges of living I think and not not interpreted in any way that impairs your understanding of yourself it should just be seen as one of the environmental challenges [35:30] very good okay so there you go number one it does cause a lot of stress which we all know is bad for you um and that stress can lead to things like rapid weight loss because you go off food and just you don't feel good and number two just not let that become a psychological damaging mechanism because it's just part of part of what we go through and how you deal with it excellent answer Dr. Pete okay so I think we have another caller on the air caller where you from and watch the question hi I am calling from Finland on the longest night of the year okay and my question was regarding to CO2 I understand was discussed previously on other shows that CO2 is beneficial and I found out that they are selling for growers mostly bags I think of fungus I suppose which generate CO2 and I was wondering if it could be a good idea to have those bags around the house to increase the CO2 level [36:40] presumably there's no spores with it too right it's just imagine yeah well hopefully not you'd be sitting there breathing not in day and night or anyway Dr. Pete did you hear all of that question not all of it where was the fungus yeah just describe again I mean is it bag is it a bag product how does it release it exactly I suppose it's a plastic bag of several kilograms or maybe I don't know six pounds or so okay and you just lay it on the soil in there there is some kind of fungus and something to feed it yeah I had a bag of masa arena from Mexico that the humidity in Oregon started a fungus growth and for about a year it was hot and producing carbon dioxide so it's a very productive passive way to increase the carbon dioxide in your bedroom for example [37:44] I don't think it's anything seriously harmful other than the carbon dioxide is beneficial and I don't think if it has a like a cloth enclosure I don't think it's going to put out any spores thank you very much okay well thank you for your call okay so the number if you live here or even if you don't live here if you live in Finland the number 707-923-3911 and I have a question my name is Michael I'm from Redway I might have missed this when I was dealing with collars but I know is a lot of people would have Candida in our community and we go through the Candida diet which would involve starving it with no sugar so does that imply that you could get some sort of colon cancer or something from it latching on and how do you get rid of it if you have the overgrowth I've heard of some bacteria to eat it given that we are on the on the subject of Candida here being positively associated here with tumors and cancers [38:46] and the underlying belief is that you starve a can starve Candida from sugar because everyone's demonizing sugar which we've always maintained is actually very good for you how do you see the treatment of Candida? just a pinch of flowers of sulfur if it's internal if it's on your cheeks you can rub it with your finger into the white spot just wet your finger dip it in the flowers of sulfur rub it on otherwise if it's in your stomach or intestine a pinch of it every day for three or four days it's very reliable for cleaning it out of your intestine and if it's in on your skin genital or crotch area in general where it's living in the sweaty area dusting the area with flowers of sulfur or I had a whole body [39:52] coverage of some kind of fungus when I was in a tropical area of Mexico and someone from the Amazon had a similar experience and she told me about the 10%!s(MISSING)ulfur soap one bath eradicated it it's amazingly effective against skin Candida infections and is flower of sulfur is that the same thing that wine makers or wine growers the powder they put on their grapes? I think they use a cruder keeper form of it it's a good fungus killer on plants on roses and grapes just elemental sulfur well I think they sublime it for some reason I think that's the relevance with flowers of sulfur but you can get it I know that we've gotten the local pharmacy here a few years back now to get it [40:53] it was one of those things you could get easily at one point in time but like so many things like iodine even become relegated to the rather more profitable and toxic versions of the latest craze so yeah anyway flowers of sulfur either topically or using a medicated flower, a medicated sulfur soap okay so we have one more caller on the air caller where you from what's your question? Hi I live in Pepperwood and my question is I was just recently diagnosed with Hashimoto's which is hypothyroidism and I have two questions I'm reading a book by Anthony William called Thyroid Healing and I wanted to know if Dr. Pete had read that and what he thought of it and my other question is my symptom is erratic blood pressures [41:59] no pattern to you know day or night or and just what he would suggest to support thyroid function and maybe stabilizing the blood pressure Have you had your TSH measured? Yes It was high, so I've had two blood works done it was five the T-H, T-S-H and then the I also had the free T-3 and free T-4 and the practitioner that I saw said that it was in the normal range but according to another book that I have been reading it was not thought to be in a normal range [43:01] Do you know what the values were? Do you have the labs with you or? I don't They were higher than so I'm reading the other book I'm reading is The End of Alzheimer's and the ranges that were given in those in that book my ranges were for one it was lower and for the other it was a little bit higher Did you actually got a diagnosis of Hashimoto's based on just the TSH or antibody studies that they did or anything else? They said that my magnesium was also in a low range and not too much alpha [44:07] It was a difficult appointment I called back and got more information over the phone Caller you're fading out there Oh I'm sorry What was suggested to you as a way forward? Just before we asked Dr. Pete his advice Wait three months and come back Okay great I think the main question is Dr. Pete the erratic blood pressure she's talking about with no seeming pattern to it and a TSH of five which is a little outside the reference range and what do you think about that I know you've dealt with very few people over your lifetime with true Hashimoto's but what would you speak to that? Brode Barnes in his books advocated the use of temperature as an important basis for diagnosing functional hypothyroidism Back in the 1930s if we use their definitions of hypothyroidism [45:11] about 40%!o(MISSING)f Americans would fit their definitions but in the 1940s the drug industry came in with some ways of chemically diagnosing hypothyroidism It happened that they were completely meaningless biologically but they convinced everyone that 95%!o(MISSING)f the population is not hypothyroid And this isn't a thorough stimulating hormone No, they were using a protein-bound iodine which has absolutely no relation to how you're experiencing your thyroid and about 20 years later when that was thrown out as completely meaningless they switched to the TSH as they call it the gold standard of thyroid diagnosis but they completely neglect the fact that stress [46:15] lowers your TSH so that you can be under such intense stress with high cortisol that your TSH can be down near zero while your thyroid gland is producing nothing Also they neglect that TSH is an inflammation promoter It in itself creates hypertension by causing inflammation directly in the blood vessels as well as in the bone marrow and every place it's been studied it has a harmful tissue effect So one of the effects of the thyroid hormone on your blood pressure is simply that it suppresses TSH People in a population that was determined to be generally healthy without heart disease or cancer [47:16] their TSH was 0.04 or less So they were all in what would be diagnosed as a hyperthyroid state So many people now are saying that the upper limit of TSH should not be higher than 2.0 and the T4 and T3 in the bloodstream can't be interpreted all by themselves You have to know what the reverse T3 is because it can interfere with the activity of the T3 itself OK, and then how about without going any further for this particular person in terms of understanding it [48:17] what would you speak to their erratic blood pressure Do you know what your blood pressure is? Yes, it varies, but it's been typically in the 140s Usually the bottom number can be 79, 85, 93 My pulse is, I believe, high at 70, 74 Sometimes it's lower than that, you know? That pulse sounds good It's good to check your temperature and pulse rate when you first wake up and then later in the day Broda Barnes believes that the waking temperature should be very close to 98 degrees and then the mid-afternoon temperature should be closer to 98.6 OK My own experience, when I stopped taking thyroid for a while [49:22] my blood pressure has gone up to something like 170 over 110 and other times as low as... Most doctors wouldn't believe it, but 55 over 28 Wow, did you feel bad when it was high? No, I felt fine, but I got back to taking more sugar and thyroid quickly but I saw how high it was I see Well... If you want, Corler, I'll give out the details at the end of the show But in case I forget, you can email me at westernbotanicalmedicine.com Just email me, just put in there I was a caller about temperature and I'll send you something that you can go fill out and we'll take a look at it Thank you so much You're welcome OK, we have another caller on the air, call away from, what's your question? [50:25] From New Jersey Two questions On vegetables, you mentioned in a previous show that they provided a lot of calcium But if you eat cooked vegetables, whether it's root vegetables or greens and you cook them, do you get rid of the poofa? And also, do you have, in addition to poofa, a phosphate to calcium ratio issue depending on the type of vegetable? Because I believe that maybe Andrew's wife had mentioned something about cooking vegetables in baking soda and for some reason that perhaps helped the phosphate ratio I could be misremembering But that's question one The second one, on mushrooms Does that have the same effect as carrots and charcoal and pade arco? How is it different from those? So those are the two [51:26] What was the question about the mushrooms again? Well, that was the second question about, is it really most targeted toward endotoxins similar to charcoal and the carrot salad? And if so, how does it work differently from those? Should it be a main staple of eating to replace or to trade off against using carrot salad or charcoal? It has a good balance of all of the nutrients compared to carrots Cooked mushrooms have, in general, a fair balance of minerals They're somewhat low in calcium, but not as bad as grains and beans and beets But they have the fibrous effect that the carrot has of helping to sweep out the intestine just by the bulk effect [52:27] The first question was on the vegetables and the root vegetables If you cook them in baking soda or water but you add baking soda, does that somehow reduce the phosphate? No, it makes the substance more digestible, so you get more protein out of it But the greens do have too much poofa to use them as your main food Even if you cook them for 40 minutes or whatever? Yeah, if you cook them for hours, much of the poofa would float to the surface And you could get some of it off that way, but still they're high in poofa And the cow's digestive system uses bacteria and vitamin E to eliminate 98%!o(MISSING)f the poofa [53:31] So it's better to process greens through cows The calcium phosphorus ratio is the best thing about greens They're extremely high in calcium relative to phosphate Are root vegetables the same or do you look at those differently? You still have to cook those for an hour and do they have benefit? Yeah, turn up for example, that they have fructose when they're in a young and fresh state And they're relatively nutritious No poofa problem on those? No what? There's less of a poofa problem in the roots than there are on the greens No much less poofa problem OK, I think we better hold it right there because it is just a couple of minutes to the top of the hour [54:34] where we're going to be ending the show So thank you so much for all the callers that have called in Dr Pete once again, thank you so much during this year as well as all the others Just giving you time and making yourself available And leaving a lasting testimony both on the internet as well as currently with people further researching what you're talking about OK, thank you OK, thanks again OK, so for people who have listened to the show and are interested to find out more about what we've discussed What Dr Pete's perspective on skin cancers is in relation to Tulio Simonsini His work with iodine and bicarbonate is an anti-cancer treatment As well as Dr Pete's perspective on cancers and health related topics of which most people may be getting the wrong information Visit his website, it's www.rayrepeat.com [55:37] He's got a lot of fully referenced articles that you can download You can read everything that he's published so far which is pretty voluminous And I believe he's still answering emails although I know he is swamped and has gotten so busy But I think he does his best to answer those and he has a newsletter also which I know a lot of people have subscribed to over the last decades But anyway, for those people who have listened to the show and have enjoyed what we have to talk about And or anything else, we can be reached Monday through Friday at 1-800-1-888 Sorry, it's not an 800 number, it's 1-888-WBMURB Or visit our website, it's westernbotanicalmedicine.com I'm actually a medical herbalist from England and we produce extracts of medicinal herbs And obviously we love alternatives to traditional, not traditional, the current therapies Which unfortunately, a lot of which seem to be very untried and causing more problems in most cases [56:43] Anyway, thanks so much for listening and be back the 3rd Friday of January 2019 Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year