---
source:
  series: Patrick Timpone's One Radio Network
  title: Fascinating Insights Into Mr. Thyroid
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/orn-190917-mr-thyroid.mp3
  mirrors:
    # The following assets derive from a shorter mp3 which ends mid interview
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/682629224.mp3
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/09.17.19%20Peat%20Ray%20One%20%5B682629224%5D.vtt
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/orn-190917-mr-thyroid.vtt
  kind: audio
  note: >
    Various sources list a shorter recording as a seperate asset. This shorter 
    recording begins one minute earlier but misses about one hour of material 
    at the end of the show.
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-20"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-20"
---
 [0:00] Well, here we go. Here it would be the third Tuesday, and that would bring us to a time when we're grateful to have a lovely and talented Dr. Ray Pied on the air on the third Tuesday. And as long as the creeks don't rise, he said, we'll do it. He's a PhD, University of Oregon, specialization in physiology. Started working with hormones back in 68. Whoa, that's when I started radio in 68 in Armed Forces Radio. He was starting his work on hormones. Wrote his dissertation in 72. He's got a great newsletter that comes out a couple times a month that you have a little link there on the show page, which you can get Dr. Pete's newsletter. And it's great to talk to him from time to time. If you have an email for him, questionpatrick.oneradionetwork.com. And out to the left coast. Dr. Pete, good morning. Good morning. How are you doing there? Very good. It [1:04] has started raining, that's winter weather setting in already. You're in Oregon, right? Yeah. You get a lot of rain there? Yeah, the weather has been pretty variable, but we're back to the world continuous rain, it looks like. The ocean is warming up. And when that happens, we get extra rain, humid air condenses. I saw the, oh, go ahead, go ahead. The nighttime rain is the traditional Northwest weather, but we had been changing over the last 30 or 40 years until it looked more like a Midwest climate. Summer rain and drier winders. But I think we're back to the old rain in the [2:07] night and winter. I saw with the Farmer's Albinac, they use sunspots and they're predicting a cold and woolly winter this year for a lot of the country. We'll see how accurate that is. Yeah, I think the sun and the submarine volcanoes are really the important thing, changing the weather over the long term rather than carbon dioxide. Yeah, submarine volcanoes? Yeah, the Pacific is really pretty full of volcanoes that actually are warming the ocean and they have cycles like sunspots. So they put a lot of heat down there and they're going on and we don't really know they're spitting up. Yeah, and they're teeming with life, primitive life forms that can live at extremely high temperatures. [3:11] And so when the, so the ocean's warm and that causes all kinds of things that happen in the jet stream and change weather changes more dramatically. Yeah, it changes the ocean currents. It's hard to imagine the carbon dioxide is like the devil. I mean, don't we want to keep more carbon dioxide in us by not breathing so fast? Yeah, yeah, one of the anti climate change people said he gets up on the box and lectures in London. He has a little sign that says carbon dioxide is the gas of life. Many people believe that. Gosh, how could you make it so political stuff? Who knows what's going on with all that? Well, Dr. Ray Peters probably one of the few well known people, [4:15] well credentialed people that got milk, you know, got that little white mustache thing and you've been drinking milk for a long time now and you do good with it. I mean, yeah, there were times like when I was living in Mexico City, when it was hard to get good milk, the rich people would send their maids out at dawn to buy up all of the good milk. And so for three or four years, I went very light on milk. But the rest of my life, I've been a big milk drinker gallon, gallon a day. You still, you're still doing that much a gallon a day? No, about two and a half quarts, I think, average amount. Wow. We had an Ayurvedic doctor on a couple weeks ago and she's a Ayurveda, as you know, you probably do know, they've been a great proponent of drinking milk for a long time, thousands of years, right? Yeah, yeah, I'm going to read you something out of her book. [5:19] I think you'll find it fun. Her name is Mary Ann Tittlebaum. Tittlebaum, she's at DC, but we found her very, very just, I don't know, very credible. She says, dairy is perhaps the most misunderstood of all food groups. The ancient doctors said that every food you eat spends three to five days in each tissue before progressing to the next. There are, as discussed earlier, seven tissues, blood plasma, blood, muscle, fat, bone, bone marrow, and reproductive fluids. This means that the food you eat today can sometimes won't nourish everything, all seven tissues, for about a month or so. The only exception to the rule is milk. It nourishes all seven tissues in one day. This milk is seen as one of the most nourishing foods of all life. This is why babies can live exclusively off milk for the first year of their life. Do you think that's accurate with going through all the tissues like that in one day? I think some of that is historical metaphor, [6:28] but there is some basis to it, not only because it's now known that every tissue has its rate of protein turnover, and as your nutrients change, the food you eat guides the turnover of the proteins, so that you get proteins suitable for the type of food you're eating. Every tissue, like bone, is extremely slow to turn over most of its substance. Your liver is very fast. The skin and intestine are extremely fast, just a few days and they're completely remade. The heart has a slower rate of protein turnover, but everything that might accondrate the energy producing apparatus is turning over constantly at its own rate. I think in general, the faster a tissue [7:30] turns over, because it's kept warm and well nourished and unstressed. High stress will make you turn over your thymus gland and muscles and skin very fast, but in a destructive way. A good warm, well-fed condition, you do have a constant turnover and renewal of your tissues. It's like a streaming. New cells are being born as the old ones are being eaten up, and so you clean out the debris at a regular pace according to the tissue. I agree with you. I think that it's been my experience, and the old ayurvedic texts, which obviously is where this came from, they began at some point. They often got very poetic and very beautiful words, and they sometimes [8:32] would expound a bit or maybe exaggerate a bit on the benefits of stuff. You know what I'm saying? Historically, I think you nailed that. Not to say it's not true, but they were very poetic and philosophical and spiritual about the approaching of different things. I know one thing that I read years ago, they're big fans of ghee rather than butter. I read one book where this fellow said, this sage, well, if you have 100-year-old ghee, it'll cure anything, that kind of thing. They would make these kinds of statements. I think your point is well taken about the historical, but fascinating. Now, she's a big fan, and Ayurveda has always been a big fan of, not a big fan, but actually saying this is the best way, is to boil the milk. Boil the milk for several reasons. I think it helps with the fat absorption, and also if you have raw milk, maybe gets rid of any [9:33] little buggies, and they put cardamom and cinnamon in there to help do some things that I'll find it in here. What about you? Do you think, have you found any benefit in the boiling milk? Have you ever done that? Oh, sure. Living outside of Mexico City, where they have cows or goats, that's the custom. Everyone puts a big pot of milk on in the morning and brings it to a boil. And usually, they skim off the fat that rises and make special dishes out of that, where I'll feed it to the cats and chickens. I wonder why you would do that. Wouldn't that fat be good? Yeah, if a person likes it, they have dishes and puddings and things that they make out of it, they use it as a sauce on tacos and such. Now, would there be any benefit to our listeners who [10:34] can't have access to raw cows or goats milk to boil like an organic grass-fed milk that could get it the whole foods or something? Surprisingly, the damage nutritionally is very small. It oxidizes some of the vitamin A and a tiny bit of the vitamin C, but milk is still basically the best source of all of the nutrients when you compare it to for the number of calories and protein in it that has all of the nutrients except iron. How about the cardamom and cinnamon thing? Any thoughts on that? Oh, each has its medical uses. I haven't been a big fan of them. Mexicans put cinnamon on their chocolate generally. [11:34] What about this A1 and A2 milk there that's been going around for years? And theoretically, the A2 milk, I guess, is supposed to be the most easily digestible. What is that from the maybe the jerseys or the whole scenes? No, A1 is found in the whole scenes, and then A2 is more in the jerseys or the guernseys. When I was little, we had a whole scene and then when I was about eight or nine, we got a jersey which we had for 10 or 15 years. And I don't really see any difference. And I think a lot of it is just marketing to sell something for a higher price if you have the right kind of cow. And Hariveta says that goat's milk is good. It's an excellent source, but it's just a little bit higher choice for cow's milk. That's interesting. Do you agree with that? [12:35] How do you know? Well, my own preference is for cow's milk just because I'm more familiar with that. When I was in the first or second grade, we had a whole scene and the neighbors had goats and their goat milk was very strong smelling. And so I learned to prefer cow's milk. But if you handle the goat stripe, the goat milk will taste as good as cow's milk. So you say you're drinking a still couple quarts a day. You find that's a lot of food for you and that provides a lot of your nutrition? Yeah, milk has always, the last 40 years, has been the bulk of my daily food. When I would drink a gallon a day, I would maybe have a couple of quarts of orange juice and some cheese or sardines or something for a supper snack and [13:44] eggs for breakfast. And that keeps you going? That would keep you going without losing, keep your muscles going. Oh, sure, yeah. How about you now? Let's see, if I recall your revolutions around the sun, which is all called age, you were 80, 83? Yeah, both in October, 83. 83 in October. Yeah, I'm going to be 73 revolutions in November. We're about 10 years apart. Have you, what has been your experience? I know you paint do you have to do other things, have you found to keep your muscles from, what's that word they use for? They always have a word. Sarcopenia. Sarcopenia, yeah. Do you have any thoughts on that? Yeah, I noticed after about 10 years of just sitting on studying [14:45] my shoulders got less rounded muscles. I could see the in photographs that my shoulder muscles were smaller because I wasn't working regularly, but just moving around my leg muscles have stayed huge after not going skiing, for example, for 10 years. Someone told me that my leg muscles must be getting weak from just sitting around reading all the time, but I tested myself doing one-legged sit-ups, and every 10 years I would do 10 one-legged sit-ups, and I didn't notice significant dropping off with time. I haven't done it for 15 years, though I don't know whether I could still do 10. Did you do any other kind of exercise regularly? No, just every 10 years I would [15:53] test myself. How often do you exercise? Oh, every 10 years, I knew. That's great. So you like orange juice, huh? You still like orange juice? Oh yeah, when good stuff is available, it should be thoroughly ripened. The commercial stuff, they are used to selling unripe oranges, and so if they accidentally get ripe oranges, they add a seeding acid to it. For example, the concentrated or canned varieties very often have acid added, but the acid enters the enamel off your teeth, so ripe oranges are safer in every way. So you would want to rinse out your mouth with clear water after orange juice? Yeah, clear water, maybe even baking soda if it's very acidic. What do you think about [16:56] taking baking soda regularly? Some people advocate that a quarter teaspoon or stuff. Do you think there's any value to that? Yeah, I know people who do as much as a teaspoon two or three times a day and think it improves their endurance and strength, but even if a fourth of a teaspoon, two or three times a day, people say that it helps reduce inflammation, and I know people who used to get swollen legs when taking a long airplane trip, and when they took a teaspoon of baking soda in water before getting on the plane, they stopped having this swollen feet. What's going on there, do you, can you surmise what you think metabolically is happening with the baking soda, sodium bicarbonate? Yeah, the sodium lowers your aldosterone very quickly, and aldosterone is a general [18:05] stress hormone that tends to go up with cortisol, which damages tissues, but aldosterone causes a shift towards inflammation and fibrosis, so the chronic elevation of aldosterone leads to heart disease and circulatory disease and kidney disease, so chronic intake of a little extra sodium such as you get with that small doses of baking soda, that has a chronic anti-stress effect, keeping your aldosterone lower, and that lets you lose the sodium fairly quickly, and the bicarbonate part is quickly changed. There's an enzyme carbonic anhydrase that changes carbon dioxide to bicarbonate and bicarbonate back into carbon dioxide, [19:07] and at the surface of your cell, when you're losing the sodium through your kidneys, your cells change bicarbonate into carbon dioxide, which is more soluble in the living cell, so it goes out of your blood more or less at the same rate that the sodium is leaving your blood bicarbonate into your cells, sodium out of your body, so what it amounts to is the same as breathing a little extra carbon dioxide or failing to hyperventilate, and low thyroid people hyperventilate and blow away the carbon dioxide they should be keeping in their cells, and so the supplement of baking soda is imitating to a degree the normal thyroid function, keeping [20:07] your cells more charged with carbon dioxide, which is a stabilizing thing that has tremendous ramifications everywhere. When you are at a high altitude there's less oxygen, and the oxygen normally is in your lungs, it exchanges with carbon dioxide, and so at sea level high oxygen pressure pushes more carbon dioxide out of your blood. At a high altitude the lower oxygen tension allows you to retain more carbon dioxide, and people have less dementia, heart disease, and cancer at very high altitudes and live longer, and that's very likely mostly the effect of retaining the proper amount of carbon dioxide, and so if you're at moderate altitude, if you're [21:13] breathing more carbon dioxide, like adding a supplement, it can be with baking soda, that extra carbon dioxide is to some degree imitating a high altitude or a better thyroid functioning. Fascinating, so the low thyroid folks, do they tend to breathe more, have more breaths per minute, and then have less carbon dioxide, which we know is good, is that right? Well relative to how much oxygen they need, because the oxygen requirement is very low in a low thyroid person, so they don't need to move very much air. Like a quart of oxygen will last a low thyroid person, maybe minutes where a high thyroid [22:17] person would be gone in seconds. I've seen it in labs where we were practicing doing the basal metabolic rate test by a rate of consuming oxygen, and for example the typical old-fashioned machine contains two liters of oxygen, and I didn't know that I was hyperthyroid. I didn't have any signs of hyperthyroidism, but in the standard test I emptied the machine in half the allotted time, so the tracing on the graph paper was almost a vertical line where it was supposed to be about a 45 degree angle to the right, and according to the standards, [23:22] I was about four times the normal oxygen consuming rate, which a doctor would say, oh that's dangerous hyperthyroidism, but I was fine, no health problems at all. Very interesting. Do you put much stock in taking the temperature to gauge thyroid function? Yeah, when you're producing energy at a high rate, say 150%!o(MISSING)f the average, you're maintaining your blood sugar level because you're using the sugar efficiently, not wasting any. The hypothyroid person wastes sugar at a terrible rate because they aren't using oxygen properly, so if you're using sugar efficiently, that means you don't experience [24:32] hypoglycemia, and so you don't produce very much adrenaline to regulate your blood sugar, and so your adrenaline level is low, your stress level is low, and everything metabolically is running efficiently, you're turning over your proteins, but in a renewal way rather than a stress produced way. Here's an email from Bat about thyroid, so I thought I'd throw it right in there. Dr. Rape, do you think fluoride and chloride in a tap water and bromide in breads are having a major effect on our thyroids? Yeah, I didn't know they were still putting bromide in breads. I don't think they are generally, but maybe this lady knows. Yeah, it isn't good if it's there, it should be avoided, and fluoride I think, [25:37] I was, for a while, using a supplement of T3, thyroid, the active thyroid hormone, and when I would go to San Francisco or an area where they have fluoridated water, I would get a migraine headache, and I looked up the amount of fluoride ions in water and the amount of T3, the number of the potential sites for the fluoride to stick to, and a glass of fluoridated water is enough to knock out a day's portion of the active thyroid hormone, and since I was using that active thyroid hormone, it was very quick and pretty noticeable that if I drank fluoridated water, [26:39] for example, in my coffee or orange juice, I would get a migraine from extreme hypothyroidism. Cynthia writes in, I take 60 milligrams, one grain of natural thyroid every day. It seems my TSH levels are normal one or two. My doctor likes that. Does Dr. Pete think that if I just keep doing this, that my thyroid will never be able to make this what it needs to do on its own? I've seen several people who were hypothyroid, who when they took the amount that brought their oxygen consumption up to the right level, had the recovery of their own thyroid function and could stop taking it. It doesn't happen very often, but I've seen several people who cured their low thyroid by supplementing thyroid. So, explain what you mean by taking the oxygen level. [27:42] How do we know? How would you know? Well, if you're sick with low thyroid, you have a variety of symptoms, and these individuals responded to supplementing their thyroid the way any hypothyroid person does, but in a few cases, they were able to maintain their metabolic rate and stop taking the thyroid because the thyroid had restored, the supplement had restored their anti-stress metabolism, lowered the adrenaline and cortisol, and allowed the tissue to start metabolizing by itself and producing its own on thyroid. But usually a person's body is loaded up with [28:44] anti-thyroid substances, polyunsaturated fats built right into the structure of the cell, not only in the fat tissue, but in their muscles and brain and so on. Especially after the age of 20, the tissues start building polyunsaturated fats right into the structure, and when you're under stress, you release some of those polyunsaturated fats into your bloodstream where they interfere with thyroid function. So, the average person in their 20s or 30s or older needs to, if they're hypothyroid, they benefit from taking a supplement for at least a few years until they can change the composition of their body. Are they better off to take the lowest possible amount when they're doing that? I mean, just to [29:47] make it work, to help it make it work on its own? Yeah, if you happen to take too much, you'll get breathless, consume too much oxygen. I've done it many times and just standing up to answer the telephone, I would start panting and had to cut back on my thyroid, but I've seen people, well, on myself, for example, when I was judging just by how I felt, I would supplement the thyroid, and one morning I noticed I had dents in my throat beside my Adam's apple where the thyroid gland had been, and about the size of my finger pressed into my throat, and I realized I had shrunk my thyroid gland, so I stopped taking the quick-acting T3. The next morning my neck was smooth, [30:53] and I've seen several people who were taking too much thyroid and shrank their gland, and in just one or two days it comes back massively. If one is taking some thyroid meds, as we call them, what's the role of taking supplemental iodine if you're not taking a thyroid or if you are? Foods such as milk and eggs always contain thyroid, even though seafood is known reliable source of trace minerals, selenium and iodine particularly, but since thyroid is a fertility hormone, animals can't produce eggs and milk if they're very hypothyroid, so you're assured that milk and eggs will always contain some iodine and some [31:54] equivalent thyroid-supporting substance, so there was a study back when iodine was sometimes used as a dough conditioner instead of bromine, and at that time the average American diet contained several times the ideal amount of iodine, and it has been about six years, 70 years since there were hypothyroid low iodine areas in the United States, like the Great Lakes region was a famous greater belt, but since food technology has started using so much iodine, there hasn't been any iodine deficiency zone in the U.S., and what happens if you take even twice, [32:56] two or three or four times the amount needed by the body, you start interfering with the function of the gland, and often people supplement more than a milligram up to as much as 10 milligrams a day, and that seriously damages the thyroid. I every couple of months hear from someone who has damaged their thyroid by taking several milligrams a day of iodine. Is that a lot milligrams I know? Yeah, the required amount is about a tenth to a fifth of a milligram per day, and taking a half a milligram per day chronically looking at a big population, that's enough to increase the incidence of thyroiditis and eventually thyroid cancer. So it sounds like what I'm hearing you saying, with some good foods, milk or eggs, and we're [33:57] going to get our fish, we're going to get enough? Yeah, yeah. And it's seriously dangerous in the long run to supplement too much iodine? I do really well, and others have too, they've mentioned with this, you know, the salmon you can get, you know, the little thin slices. What do you call that? I guess smoked salmon and things like, you think that's a generally good food? Yeah, it's nutritious, but you can overload on polyunsaturated fat if you eat salmon all the time. Oh, there's poofas in salmon? Oh, yeah, a lot of poofa. Well, what are they doing there? I thought there's a fish. Yeah, the cold water fish eat algae. The algae is the source of the poofas. So you tend to, you like to gravitate more towards a warm water fish? [35:01] Yeah, as far as it's available, but a small amount, there are some low fat fish that come from pretty cold waters. Cod and solo are the lowest fat fish that I know of, and I think they're safer than salmon if you're going to eat fish every week. Oh, really? Okay, can you stay right there? We're going to take a little break here. Patrick Tempone. One radio network dot com. One of the most powerful antioxidants ever is actually browns gas. Well, hydrogen and the machine that we have, the aquacure machine, is makes browns gas, which is, it's kind of different than actual molecular hydrogen, browns gas, and that's what George's machine makes, the one that we promote. It's very quiet, and you can bubble in the water and then breathe it, and they have a whole little setup there, [36:04] which is digital, and depending on your body weight, you know exactly how much to put in there. You just dial that in, and when you do just the water, you can just dial in 100%!o(MISSING)f the browns gas going into the water, drink the water, and then if you're going to drink it and make water at the same time, it's fine because you'll still make plenty of hydrogen in the water. It's a fascinating, most abundant, just gas or thing in the universe hydrogen. It's just like, I think 96%!o(MISSING)f everything that's out there. So we have a great little machine that we promote, and if you use promo code 1 radio, you get a 10%!,(MISSING) and look upon it as an investment, and you're out there a couple thousand bucks, but this thing has got a lifetime warranty, lifetime warranty, and also a one year, no questions asked, money back if you don't like it. Now that's pretty cool. Lots of safety features that most of the hydrogen browns gas machines do not have, [37:10] and that's important because hydrogen, molecular hydrogen, and making browns gas, it's a very energetic substance. Let me put it like that. I mean, you can do hydrogen cars and hydrogen, whatever. It's very, it's so volatile, so you got to be careful with it, but your body likes it. It's one of the biggest antioxidants in anti-inflammatory. Good things are going in my body with lower inflammation. I can feel it. I can just feel it. I don't know why. I just feel more comfortable in my body after breathing this gas. It's a nice thing, and here's more on it from George who makes the machine. This was previously with George Wiseman about his aquacure machine making hydrogen, gas, and water out of the same hose. Listen. The body accepts that gas and uses it to heal everything. It's like the fountain of youth. It's an astonishing the amount of ailments. In fact, in scientific studies, and they have over a thousand scientific studies now, [38:13] they are showing that it either helps the body heal directly or indirectly from virtually every ailment that ails any water-based life form, but it works just as well on animals and plants and lizards and birds and everybody. Can you say this because this machine called the aquacure flit into five different parts? Six. I got hydrogen, oxygen, electro, enhanced water, water vapors, monotomic hydrogen. What else? And monotomic oxygen. Oh, the mono oxygen, and that's what your machine does? It splits it? Yes, it makes that mixture inside the machine, and all that comes out of a single hose, the same hose. A gas? As a gas, in gaseous form gas. And you breathe it or you put it in water? So if you bubble the Brown's gas into this water. Into, let's say distilled water. It will go to a negative ORP, and when you drink that, it actually gives your body an electrical energy, these electrons. Instead of sucking energy from you, it gives it. So you can have water that is healthful and not healthful just by the energy [39:15] that's in the water. You want to get one? Me too. Ours is on the way. Check this out. Lifetime warranty on the machine itself, and then a one-year, no questions asked, money-back guarantee. If you don't, if you like the machine within a year. I mean, have you ever heard of a warranty like that? The AquaCure, use promo code 1 radio, promo code 1 radio for a 10%!d(MISSING)iscount, it's in our store on 1radionetwork.com. And keep in mind the idea of dehydration, surely the lack of hydrogen. Dehydration really helps your body to become hydrated. Really nice machines. Wayne Blakely is with us, and he makes the Living Streams products. There's two different Bifidols. Let's talk about the straight product that is Bifidol, and then there's Bifidol 2. What is the Bifidol used for? The Bifidol is used as a probiotic nutrient, which has curcumin in it and turmeric in it, which has certain minerals and nutrients in [40:15] it that helps the body, especially absorption of your food. Curcumin is the most researched supplement in the world. The researchers don't really understand how curcumin works in the body, and curcumin is very hard to digest in the digestive tract. So we predigest the curcumin, which has, we buy our product, our curcumin from India, because it has a mineral in it called yttrium, and we use the bacteria to break down the yttrium, the correct bacteria, to break down the yttrium so our body can assimilate it so we can absorb our food correctly, and it stops plaque in the body. Pretty cool stuff, isn't it? Wains on it, and the lack of bacteria in the soil in this country is the whole issue. Yttrium is in short supply. Very unique products. Living streams. He's talking about the Bifidol, and it's in our store on oneradionetwork.com. The Ayurveda lady that was on the show. We're going to have her back on Dr. Titlebaum. She was really, [41:23] really big on Moringa, too, as an incredible tree, nutrient, herb, whatever you want to call it, and if you want to get a real natural way, full-fledged away, Wayne has a Moringa product that's in a probiotic. Very easy to absorb, and you get a big bottle of it, and you can just you can drink a lot of it in Moringa. It's pretty amazing what's going on with Moringa. So fun things they're all in our store. Excuse me, all in our store on one radio network. Had a cop there. If you would like to get more information, you can talk to Wayne's protege or helper, Maryland, 360-912-2981. 360-912-2981. She can give you more insights on this or that or, you know, what is good for. We have some things for perimenopause, and Wayne's very careful. He doesn't [42:28] say a lot of stuff because, oh, you know, the FDNA, they get all carried away, can't make any claims, and I understand, but Maryland can give you some information. She doesn't do medical advice, neither do I, or nobody on our guest list ever do medical advice. It's all up to you. But anyway, these probiotics work like probiotics are supposed to. LivingStreamsOneRadioNetwork.com. We talk about your health, wealth, and well-being on OneRadioNetwork.com. Well, it's an honor to have Dr. Ray Pete on our show, and he's consented to come on on the third Tuesday, and we're here. So, Dr. Pete, thanks so much for coming on from time to time. People like you. People like you. You're a rock star around here. They just like you. What do you know about vasal, vagal, SY, and COPE? An emailer is talking about [43:31] the vagus nerve gets activated due to stressors, the heart rate slows, blood pressure drops, blood vessels in the legs can dilate, the blood pools in the lower part flow into the brain, and maybe nausea and things like that. And this lady, Mona, wants to know that what besides the stressor is causing the vagus nerve to react so, there has to be more to it than simply being a response to being hot, emotional, scared when in a normal life setting. Yeah, low thyroid people tend in that direction. I wrote some newsletters a few years ago on shock, and the history of shock goes back a few hundred years, but it really became a major [44:32] aspect of physiology just a little over a hundred years ago, the beginning of the 20th century, when one of the pioneers was George Washington Crial, who was a son at the Cleveland Clinic, which was founded by G.W. Crial the first. The son was a pioneer in both thyroid therapy and breast cancer treatment. He innovated the lumpectomy rather than the horrible radical mastectomy, and he practically eliminated thyroid surgery, went from over a thousand surgeries a year in the clinic to just a dozen by understanding how the thyroid can be treated. But his father was the real pioneer that led to that understanding of the thyroid, [45:36] and his thyroid work grew out of his surgical experiments in which he really explained more than anyone else what shock is and how the vagus nerve governed shock, and what happens in shock is that signals are sent to all of your body cells turning off the ability to use oxygen, and the use of oxygen is what thyroid is in control of. The more thyroid you have, the more oxygen your cells can use, and within a broad range, that means that your metabolism becomes more and more efficient as you use more oxygen, so the low thyroid person is wasting their energy. But in shock, it's even worse than hypothyroidism. It simply turns off [46:47] the mechanism for burning, for using oxygen and burning any fuel, and so it imitates death, basically. When a person in shock is cut, their blood stays bright red, they aren't using the oxygen in their blood because the tissue is simply switched off metabolically. It's like turning off thyroid in a nervous or electrical way rather than a chemical way, and the George Washington cryo showed that stimulating the vagus nerve was the basic signal for turning on shock, whether it was caused by loss of blood or pain or fright or whatever. The signals through [47:51] the vagus system were able to switch off basically the life process temporarily, and that process is easier to trigger the lower your thyroid function is. You become more of a vagal organism when your thyroid is lower, but people generally, if they're going to keep functioning at all, they compensate for that exaggerated activity of the vagal nervous system by pumping out extra adrenaline. Their adrenal glands become overactive, and they run as much as 40 or 50 times the normal amount of adrenaline production compensating for that abnormal activity [48:54] of the vagal opposing system, the parasympathetic system, is the vagal system and the adrenaline system is the sympathetic nervous system. Surprisingly, many people are running with both sides of their autonomic nervous system running at an extremely high rate, and if something interferes with their production of adrenaline and sympathetic activity, then they drop into the vagal state and move towards shock, fainting, for example. Well, a lot of questions there. Kyle, is that KYLE, and this work seems, it kind of feels like this is long ago? I don't understand the question. Kyle, this work with GW Kyle, was this long ago? Kyle, C-R-I-L-E. Oh, C-R-I-L, oh, Carl, okay. Yeah. Long time ago? [50:03] Yeah, the senior Kyle died, I think, in the 1940s, and the junior died not long ago in the 90s, I think. And what did he do to lower all these surgeries that he went from thousands to a handful? What did he do? Oh, supplementing thyroid, basically. Oh, he just gave supplemental thyroid. Yeah, things they were calling thyroid cancer. It was just a minor condition that he could turn off just by giving them a full replacement dose of thyroid. Really? Was he using TSH and all that as a metric? No, not at all. TSH measurement came in later, really, and he was measuring it enough to realize that people developing these symptoms of thyroid cancer, nodules and so on, were [51:12] experiencing the same condition that iodine supplementary experience with a very high TSH, and so he understood that TSH was driving towards thyroiditis and eventually thyroid cancer, and so he would give usually three or four grains of armor thyroid sufficient to lower the TSH to zero. And then these people, without thyroidectomy, or maybe just partial removal of the cancerous part, would live a normal life just keeping their TSH down so that any surviving cancer cells wouldn't be stimulated by the TSH. My goodness. Three or four grains. Now, a grain is 16 milligrams. I mean, that's a lot, isn't it? Well, two grains was the average dose for just the run of the mill, [52:13] low thyroid middle-aged person, but sometimes just to have good functioning, some people took three or four or even five grains. The armor company sold tablets of five grains, and veterinarians found that that was the right dose for cocker spaniels, and a couple of breeds of dogs needed about five grains a day, and quite a few people. They sold bottles of I think it was 500 five-grain tablets for $10 or so. And I've seen a few people who needed more than five grains, 10 or 15 grains a day to cure their problem, and then they would settle in on four or five grains a day for maintenance. My goodness. It seems like a very [53:17] high dose what we hear around, but I guess, so how did this Carlisle, how did he judge the dosage if he wasn't using the labs? Oh, the basal metabolic rate was still in use through the 1940s and into the 50s, then the chemical. The first test was a blood test called a protein-bound iodine came in just around the same time that synthroid came on the market. It turned out 20 years later that it was an absolute meaningless thing, but at the time I was in junior high at the time, and several of my friends said they had learned that they didn't have a glandular problem because the protein-bound [54:19] iodine showed that they had a fully normal amount of protein-bound iodine in their blood, and so they discovered that they were just gluttonous. So they brought this med thing out right when the synthroid came out. I mean, they test. Yeah, it really was part of a marketing system. Stoes of rascals. What they did was blame the problem on the patient rather than supplementing with Armour thyroid, which was a good reliable product. My goodness. So back to Mona, who brought up this whole Vegas, so she might have on both ends working overtime with the sympathetic with the Vegas and then the adrenaline, right? How would then, how do you lower all that down? Is it just looking after Mr. Thyroid? Using your temperature and pulse rate, you can come fairly close to the old oxygen consumption test, which that's still the ideal [55:22] way to prove hypothyroidism, but you can make a very good guess by taking your temperature before you get out of bed in the morning and checking your pulse rate at the same time. If you're lots of the low thyroid people are running on high adrenaline, which rises during the night and that tends to push up the cortisol. The adrenaline sometimes will cause 90 or 100 beats per minute heart rate when you're waking up, sometimes following the nightmare. And if the cortisol goes up higher than average, it always tends to rise around dawn. But the higher your cortisol rises, the higher your waking temperature will be. The adrenaline speeds your pulse at dawn, the cortisol raises the temperature and helps to push the heart rate back down by bringing [56:29] your blood sugar up. So just that one measurement can be ambiguous, high adrenaline, high cortisol, or low, both of them. But if you then take your temperature and pulse rate an hour or two after eating, the food will lower your adrenaline and the daylight and food will lower your cortisol. And very often these people who woke up seeming to have a very normal 75 beats per minute pulse rate and a 98 degree temperature, these people will sometimes drop to a 55 or 60 pulse rate and a 96 or 97 degree temperature at 11 o'clock in the morning. What does that tell you if that happens? That they're super low thyroid. Okay, so the Broda Barnes thing wasn't kind of sort of right. I mean, if you had a 98, [57:33] you know, according to Broda Barnes and you were good, but this whole adrenaline and cortisol thing, you're saying that maybe not. Yeah. In hot, humid summers in Eugene, I first started questioning Barnes's temperature measurement. He worked at Fort Collins, Colorado, where it never gets very hot and humid for very long. And I saw that people in this hot and humid weather, even very hypothyroid people, kept a normal temperature. But usually with a normal temperature, they would get a slow pulse rate. So I started adding the two together. But then I saw that a very stressful nighttime would make both of the [58:34] indicators sometimes look normal at dawn or waking. And then they would go down on a cool mid morning or afternoon. That's fascinating. That's a very, very, very interesting. So you have mentioned before that folks, if they want to start taking a thyroid, that they start slow and do it maybe even half a grain or something for a couple weeks. You think that's a good idea to get the body kind of used to it? Yeah, that is a traditional way to say ideally a month because you're adrenaline and cortisol are going to come down as the thyroid comes up. So at two weeks, you might seem just right. And then you start slowing down again when your adrenaline comes down towards normal. [59:37] So maybe 30 grains, a half of a tab, might be a good thing for a few weeks or a month. Yeah. And watching those measurements because it's like a sawtooth pattern. You rise to normal and then your hormones adjust and you flip back and then you increase the dose and rise to normal for a while. And then if you normalize your adrenaline and lower your stress, then your metabolism slows down again for a while. So that's why if you do both, you can kind of gauge. So what you want is after an hour after eating around 11 or so, the ideal would then be the more 98 temp and more higher pulse rate? Yeah, 80 or 85 in the middle of the day is a good pulse rate. 75 at least and 85 or 90 is okay. And temperature 98 to 98 and a half. [1:00:43] So could you diagnose for Patrick here? I'm like 60 all the time. Just doesn't change. I mean, it seems fine to me. For me, Doc, if I had 75, I would think I'd be like total anxiety or something. Oh, no. The thyroid, one of the things it does by lowering this transform on and you feel more and more relaxed and the higher pulse rate. Yeah. But how you feel is a good indicator. You don't want to push it into the anxiety because that means you're turning on your stress. And serotonin is an additional complicating factor. The vagal system and the adrenaline system is one complication of interpreting thyroid function, but the serotonin also tends to go down as your thyroid comes up. [1:01:47] And the serotonin is a promoter of hyperventilation. And so the low blood glucose, low oxygen consumption person often will have an actual hyperventilation driven by the increased serotonin. And that serotonin disturbs both your adrenal mineral regulation and your parathyroid hormone. It drives your parathyroid hormone up and that is worse if you're low in either calcium intake or low in vitamin D. And that's why I talk a lot about calcium and vitamin D in relation to thyroid because low thyroid means usually higher serotonin activity, hyperventilation, [1:02:50] disturbed calcium metabolism and dependence need for more vitamin D. We talked a bit about dopamine last hour. How does dopamine play into the whole what we've just talked about the last 10 minutes, dopamine? It's similar to the adrenaline or sympathetic nervous opposition to the shock tendency of the vagal or sympathetic system. It's the body's balancing factor for serotonin. You can get too much of both of those and you get symptoms like nightmares and insomnia. Water and salt regulation become a problem when those go up. So you want to keep your [1:03:53] serotonin down and under control and then your dopamine will take care of keeping things in balance usually. So on the shock idea you're talking about could be a traumatic event in someone's life? An emotional shock will turn off your thyroid function and all of those other the adrenals in the parathyroid system tend to get out of control as your thyroid goes down. I wonder why though after you get over the shock and you forgive the shock person and all that and spiritually and emotionally that the you know these thyroid wouldn't start just get attacked together without the meds? I think that's because of the tissues having been slightly deranged by storing poofa in their fat and usually young people can take a big shock [1:05:01] better than people in their 30s and 40s when their tissues are destabilized by the fat. An emotional upset will more reliably cause a chronic thyroid problem in a person in their 30s in their teens. Dr. Ray Peters with us. Oh that's my dog there just shaking. Hi dude, don't say hi to Dr. P. Dr. Ray Peters with us and you can see on the show page there well he has a a bimonthly newsletter every couple months and very very affordable you can click on there and sign up and get some cool stuff and help support him so he can buy paints and stuff you know he doesn't everyone it's good to have a little stuff coming in here um so here's one for you this is pretty fun what's more effective eating a whole orange drinking its juice or eating marmalade? I'm the marmalade has the extract of the peeling which has a lot of therapeutic things [1:06:15] I haven't seen any real comparisons but people occasionally have advocated eating the peeling raw but that's extremely hard on the stomach and cooking the peeling extracts some of the anti-inflammatory protective things neuroengine and neuroengine and are major protective factors in orange peeling that you get in the marmalade and the added sugar is an added and anti-stress factor that supports your thyroid but ideally the juice you can get all of those good things in the absence of good orange juice marmalade is a kind of a medical substitute and if you if you have good oranges you wouldn't want to eat the number of oranges it [1:07:21] takes to make a gallon of orange juice but it's fine to drink a gallon of orange juice in hot weather but all of that all of the fiber in an orange would probably be a burden to your digestive system here's a good one would you ask um I experience malabsorption that no matter what or how much I eat I stay underweight symptoms like gnawing ulcer type pain that flares up at night to cause insomnia and eating iron-rich foods like organ meats which were previously well tolerated now exacerbate this pain so getting some pain at night ulcer type pain at night and can't seem to gain weight can you gauge what might be going on for this person um my personal experience and knowing half a dozen other people usually men in their 20s and 30s some [1:08:28] individuals can eat several thousand calories a day without gaining weight I've known people who weighed for a normal height weighed 130 140 pounds very very skinny who were eating three or four thousand calories a day and based on my own experience when I first supplemented thyroid I was in my late 30s I think suddenly I didn't need to eat so much my calorie requirement dropped in half simply by adding thyroid and so I suggested that to these skinny men who were eating three or four thousand calories and staying very skinny suddenly they had the same experience they didn't have to eat more but suddenly they put on muscle [1:09:32] and that shows that thyroid is an anabolic hormone when it's in the right balance but if it's deficient and you're running on adrenaline your cells know that the energy isn't being produced in the right way it's being produced by the stress of adrenaline so you're burning calories under the influence of adrenaline because these cells can't retain the magnesium that stabilizes the energy level of the cell your your thyroid can be making you use the oxygen and produce the ATP and be fairly efficient in those ways but in the absence of a certain amount of thyroid your cells lose magnesium and so they have to make the ATP again so you're making ATP [1:10:35] at a high rate but losing it because it breaks down in the absence of magnesium and supplementing magnesium for about an hour will relax and stabilize the cells but you need a certain amount of thyroid to make the cells retain it and stay in that efficient relaxed condition and it's it's a matter of letting your cells relax so that they can build themselves up instead of being constantly running and stressing themselves so that that's where the thyroid is visibly a very powerful anabolic hormone anabolic so that's a little color intuitive because isn't often hypothyroid isn't connected with the overweight very often but if you look at the old textbooks [1:11:37] they at the beginning of thyroid surgery they forgot to replace the thyroid hormone with a powdered or squashed up animal thyroid gland and when a person's thyroid gland was removed they went into catexia they looked like an advanced cancer patient worse than sarcopenia sarcopenia to an extreme degree they wasted away in the absence of the thyroid hormone and that's that's what's happening to these often young or middle aged men who are just moderately hypothyroid but it's enough to move them into that catectic or sarcopenic state of not being able to build their muscle fast enough that's really interesting this is from Cindy she's in Alabama [1:12:39] I've been told that when a person has Hashimoto's or other autoimmune issues they should not use natural desiccated thyroid medications such as armor or nasiathroid because the body will attack these because they are natural question mark the body supposedly does not attack the synthetic medication like synthroid and I prefer not to use a synthetic what is your view on this the autoimmune so-called condition is an excited inefficient state like when the cell can't retain magnesium it stays in an excited state and if there's a hormone additionally increasing the excitation like TSH stimulates the thyroid gland and if it gets the the nutrients it needs to to make the hormone in the right balance not too much iodine then the cell is [1:13:45] energized and works if something is lacking so it can't produce the thyroid hormone the TSH keeps rising stimulating it more driving it harder stressing it more until it is killing the cells causing thyroiditis and in a condition of inflammation your immune system comes in to activate the turnover the phagocytosis of the damaged overexcited over stressed cells the the immune system is clearing up a damage tissue and that has been experimentally shown several times that for example in artificially inflamed brains in animals [1:14:47] they find that what what they thought was autoimmune inflammation of the brain caused by a virus or some external cause was actually being remedied by the immune system if they removed that so-called autoimmune antibody the inflammation killed the animal the the immune system antibodies directed against itself if they're properly supported are cleaning up the damaged tissue remedying the problem and people have demonstrated that you where you have the so-called autoimmune anti-thyroid anti-globulin anti-proxidase enzymes specific to the thyroid if they supplement enough thyroid to lower the TSH you stop producing the antibodies and [1:15:54] the antibodies when they finish cleaning up the damaged tissue will gradually fade away take several months of keeping the TSH low but there have been several publications demonstrating that the condition corrects itself after several months wow man that's pretty trippy oh etc that applies to things like rheumatoid arthritis several other types of so-called autoimmune conditions let's see this is from wendy wondering if dr. p knows anything about oh the perlceum powder that we we promote it's made from just pearls if he thinks that would be a good source for calcium do you know anything about that product made from what pearls pearls calcium carbonate i think is is the best supplement calcium carbonate [1:16:57] calcium carbonate yeah and egg shells and oyster shells and other other sea creatures shells but you don't have any experience with the pearl itself pearl yeah yeah pearl yeah pearl i don't no no you don't yeah chinese medicine or you better use this pearl for different things and that's what she she was asking yes they're they're made of calcium carbonate yeah oh they are martin oh good so that's a good source then yeah good another question well i'm glad to hear um we thought so would calcium another source of calcium would be in fish bones she's asking i used to eat sardines with fish bones and he seemed digestible but now with avoiding poofers with the bones from cod or some other source be good as calcium source for those with sensitive guts um it is a calcium source that is okay but the trouble is that it is calcium phosphate and phosphate has an excitatory [1:18:04] effect and most people are overloading on phosphates and so the bones will move in the right direction but if you're still eating a lot of meat meat and grains and legumes for example are overloading you with phosphate and so calcium phosphate helps but it isn't as effective as as calcium carbonate or the carbonate you like the carbonate yeah i love this show writes kody she's in florida well thanks kody i'm interested to know ask oh would you have talked to pete how long he sleeps each night and do you sleep uninterrupted sleep she's asking you about your sleep um it depends on how good the weather is how good my food was and so on but seven and a half to nine hours it's variable usually i wake up during the night and have some milk and sugar or [1:19:12] orange juice to lower the stress having milk at bedtime will lower several of the stress hormones yeah i've got an habit of if i wake up in the night having some sugar and milk or orange juice and milk and that that resets the the hormones so that you don't experience the same amount of stress around dawn yeah what fun so you put say if you would have milk in the middle of the night when you wake up would you put actual sugar in there or honey or maple syrup what would you use pure white sugar is the safest pure white sugar from Hawaii right that kind of why is that the safest over you would think honey or maple syrup is a more better choice no honey is very good but if the bees happen to eat something you're allergic to oh you can have an allergic [1:20:19] reaction to the plant substance that gets into the honey and maple sugar is extremely nutritious for minerals but the heating process makes the sugar allergenic oh i didn't know they heat it doctor i thought they just kind of dump it out of the the old tree no it it comes out in a very liquid slightly amber color but a very pale thin liquid and it has to be evaporated and they use heat to evaporate it theoretically you could do it at room temperature with a high vacuum but it's economical to heat it and the heating process uh there are small amounts of amino acids in the juice as well as minerals and when you heat glucose with an amino acid [1:21:24] it produces a toxic reactant so your go-to is c and h pure sugar pure cane sugar from Hawaii um well actually you could probably get an organic one though can't you uh uh yeah you can but it's so well washed uh uh you you get uh 99 and more percent pure sucrose but i think beet sugar might even be better who beat sugar is that white oh sure yeah they're they're washed they would be brown but they wash the molasses away and the molasses is brown partly because of the heat process reacting amino acids with the glucose making a brown substance that is uh uh it is similar to the substance that's produced in aging reacting glucose with amino acids [1:22:25] but isn't have i read or did i dream this that a lot of the beats are genetically modified now you want to do organic or oh probably yeah you you hopefully aren't getting any proteins the proteins are the allergenic toxic form and that's what genetic modification does is make new proteins right which are toxic and allergenic and here's one i know that dr peters recommended raw carrots cooked mushrooms bamboo shoots for the antibiotic properties but that our gut bacteria can get used to these is just alternative alternating with those enough or should one supplement with doses of antibiotics oh yeah if you're having a problem with hormone imbalance and stress at a fertility clinic about 35 years ago they discovered they had the theory that [1:23:31] infertility might be caused by germs and so they gave some women antibiotics and didn't do much for their fertility that they saw but a lot of them said that that their their pms and headaches had gone away and so they started measuring their hormones and they found that in fact it had to improve their fertility balance by lowering estrogen and cortisol and increasing their progesterone and that wasn't just a fertility clinic in humans but people then tested it in animals and of course of antibiotics reliably lowered estrogen and cortisol the stress hormones and increased progesterone and that's the idea of the fiber when the fiber is working it is binding and eliminating estrogen so it isn't reabsorbed and passed through the liver [1:24:38] repeatedly the fiber eliminates estrogen that lowers the stress so your cortisol goes down and that combination allows your progesterone to be retained properly go figure that's really interesting i sure like dr pete's show thanks for having him on on a previous show dr pete mentioned possibly placing a red light at your bedside with a timer to come on intermittently through the night to eliminate the reduce of stress caused by darkness could you further ask about implementing this idea and if would be helpful or not maybe somebody else mentioned that i don't know if you said that sorry um did you did you talk about that idea of intermittent red light yeah i've tried different things and it bothered me to have it come on in my face and so i made a a paddle or a belt with leds and found that putting it on my leg [1:25:41] didn't bother me so much and shining red light on your blood anywhere in your body has a de-stressing effect but uh i have um not not consistently used that i i think it's adequate to have a chronic daylight continuous incandescent or sunlight during during your daytime is enough to lower your stress but i think it is good to have an air ionizer running all the time especially during the night because ionized negatively ionized air activates your lungs ability to lower serotonin and and lower the stress of night what's an air ionizer what does it do i don't know if i know about that is oh is that a negative ion generator [1:26:42] yeah yeah it adds electrons to the oxygen and it creates in effect a radical as far as your lung enzymes can tell it's activated metabolic oxygen more immediately accessible to destroy serotonin as it reaches your lungs and the lungs are constantly keeping your serotonin in check when a person has a digestive problem that wakes them up at night with various symptoms including insomnia that irritation of the intestine is putting tremendous amounts of serotonin into your blood carried on the platelets depending on your lungs to inactivate it and uh if your estrogen happens to be high [1:27:47] and your your lungs are relatively uh in inactive in destroying the serotonin uh many things can make your lungs inefficient leaving the serotonin active causing insomnia boy what do you do in a case like that in the middle of the night what would be the any kind of symptomatic relief um i have milk and sugar milk and sugar yeah good old milk and sugar last month as soon as she's in canada she talked about how oh dr pete talked about how protein powders except for gelatin contains some toxic amino acids please ask dr pete whether hydrolyzed collagen powder is as effective as gelatin powder for protein and whether it has toxic effects i know that the amino acids uh tryptophan cysteine and methionine are the ones that are susceptible to uh toxic oxidation [1:28:51] and gelatin just doesn't have those and so you can pre-digest the gelatin into the amino acids uh hydrolyzed gelatin is uh short peptides and some free amino acids and those that as as far as i know uh they're easy to digest and that are no more problems than natural gelatin so you you like the the the Great Lakes gelatin and those kind of products as your as your as protein powders go you like those the best is that you say uh yeah yeah or making your own gelatin with chicken back wings and legs and feet yeah we've been doing it with the feet in a crock pot and boy shoo man is there a lot of gelatin in there holy cow yeah it's a lot i mean you put that in the fridge and it's just solid just like salad is a rock yeah yeah that [1:29:56] that's very good protective nutrition an adult can use a very high proportion of their protein as gelatin a growing kid needs some of those potentially toxic amino acids tryptophanes and and cysteine are needed for growth but once you you have achieved full growth all they're needed for is things like the turnover of cells renewal is running at a lower rate than expansion of volume i should mention that uh a fellow tony has put together a really nice little array of these red incandescent lights the chicken lamps there's five of them and they're on a board with a little switch and they're it's in our store very well built and you can just probably set this guy on the somewhere in your living room i guess at night or wherever you stay and just shine the [1:30:56] red light on you and it'll be beneficial wouldn't it dr beat it doesn't have to be all that close to you no and it penetrates very well uh red light if you've looked at uh your hand against the sun you can see red light coming through that's because red light penetrates very well and the blue and green light is absorbed superficially so relatively weak red light will will penetrate your tissues so the length of the the distance between these lights is not critical uh no the brighter the quicker it works though sure sure sure these guys get pretty hot so i guess you have to gauge that of how warm you want to be yeah yeah in the winter though i mean just keep warm my boy how important is an optimal thyroid function to consider writes an email or for stomach acid production due to the high concentration of mitochondria in parallel cells [1:32:03] where stomach acid is produced uh the thyroid makes carbon dioxide and the carbon dioxide is flowing in proportion to your metabolic activity it's the oxidizing function governed by thyroid that creates the stomach acid so you start with carbonic acid and use that to energize the production of hydrochloric acid so low thyroid would often be correlated with low stomach acid yeah a slow digestion all of the digestive processes tend to slow down but gastroparesis is supposedly a mysterious condition that is usually immediately remedied by five thyroid supplements now my goodness oh well let's see it's time to go here let's see [1:33:14] let's do a couple more then we'll let you go um what oh there was one here i thought was interesting many catholic monks somehow lived past 100 well nothing but bread and water do you think their lack of movement may have conserved their carbon dioxide that's a great question um yeah the the church uh both the orthodox church in in the Caucasus region and the catholic church in south america for example uh they've been keeping uh marriage birth and death records for hundreds of years and they've documented lots of people living 130 150 years and more in these areas in england the they keep pretty good records going [1:34:19] back several hundred years and that they have the record one old guy old par they called him lived into his hundred and fifties according to good documents and he was uh taken to visit the king because he was such such a an exceptional person they he died shortly after visiting the king and changing his diet he said he had habitually eaten cheese and bread crusts very very cheap minimal diet but he died after having some banquets with the king oh because they eat all this rich food the kings and and autopsy found that there was no disease in his body in his hundred hundred and fifties [1:35:24] and uh in uh Abkhazia in the Caucasus and Vilcabamba in the Andes there are well documented uh multiple cases of people in their hundred and forties and fifties and older and what kind of diets today get the 140 uh very simple diets and those are high altitude areas where they have both uh sheep uh goats and and cows and so they eat a good proportion of milk and cheese in their diet as well as having the high altitude environment that spares their carbon dioxide and uh the the monks monks and priests uh have uh uh usually a very very simple [1:36:27] uh uh routine diet uh i think sometimes they uh might fall into just the right balance of nutrients not not too much meat for example uh meat is a very pro-aging thing because of the low calcium high phosphate content uh i think that the high phosphate is probably one of the life shortening things so there we are with the phosphate again but you don't generally think or maybe i don't i'm just not thinking properly about uh bread as being nutritious but i guess it depends on the essence of the original grain and how it's made and everything a little bit yeah if it's made traditionally uh letting the yeast rise gradually but that uh the keeping the grain moist the grain thinks it's sprouting when you let it leaven naturally the moisture activates enzymes [1:37:32] that break down the gluten uh and reduce the toxicity and make it more digestible so it's a reliable simple carbohydrate source and the uh it does provide the trace minerals and uh if they have cheese or milk to balance that the calcium becomes the predominant mineral which i think has an anti-stress life prolonging effect well that's kind of fun you could just live on toasted cheese sandwiches and milk you know it'd be kind of kind of cool okay finally what's your take i don't know if we've ever asked you about this about the whole gluten thing give us here uh to kind of wrap up your opinion on what's going on with this gluten sensitivity where how it began and stuff um partly the seeds and grains have their plant defense systems leaves leaves contain [1:38:37] insecticides and flavor irritants that discourage grazing from cows and insects and worms and such uh and the seeds are very important for the plant's survival just like the leaves uh the worst toxins tend to be put in the seeds to block digestion and cause as much trouble for the predator of the plant as possible and polyunsaturated fats are able to inhibit digestion if they're an oily seed and the the gluten high gluten seeds the gluten itself is able to block digestive processes and cause inflammation uh there are parts of the gluten [1:39:37] molecule that have have similar effects to estrogen for creating allergic reactions in the intestine inflammatory reactions and if if you let the enzymes activate the seeds so that as far as it knows it has succeeded in becoming a plant then the intense toxins of the seed have been inactivated and you have have the stem chemicals which are much much less toxic than either the mature leaf or the seed so leavened bread uh is detoxified basically when it's soaked for about 12 hours in in moisture so so is a gluten sensitivity it's a real thing [1:40:41] uh yeah it's an objective thing that if your immune system is very active and stable you you can adapt to it and pass it pass it along quickly enough without damage yeah have you had an experience with some of this real ancient wheat hind corn the real deal have you ever experienced any of that um if they aren't if they aren't leavened uh the smaller uh seeds have some of the more intense toxins same with small beans uh the embryo is the larger part and the storage protein is smaller but there are some very intense allergens in the smaller more primitive seeds really so it's still important to make sure they're well leavened to oh leaven [1:41:44] it's so the leavening the yeast and the sourdough um make it make it nicer for us yeah less allergenic oh less allergenic yeah yeah so if you were going to do some sprouts do you do sprouts at all do you make any sprouts at all not for many years if you were going to do some somebody wants to know what would be your your favorites to do the most digestibles what they're asking George oh they're all vastly more digestible than the seeds but they should be cooked to to improve their digestibility they should be well cooked oh you cook sprouts as well oh the the chinese sure yeah the um either a bean or a grain if it's fully sprouted develops at least twice as much uh protein value as was in the bean or the grain itself [1:42:47] right yeah so you're you're getting an actual protein supplement when you're sprouting yeah you can we used to do like black beans and other beans and dookie beans and you can sprout those guys just on a what towel right and you can see a little tail come out and then and then you cook them so it really it really uh zoops up the zoops up the protein huh at at the same time that it's reducing the allergenicity in toxicity wow and we could pretty you could pretty much sprout any kind of bean cancer doc can you soak them first and sprout them yeah if they haven't been sterilized which some some products in the US supermarkets have been yeah irradiated or heated or chemically treated yeah do you know if they can irradiate organic do we know if that's a protection bean organic do we do you know I haven't heard what the latest standards are but yeah they're pushing in that direction are they yeah well doc so so [1:43:47] it's such an honor to have you on and people love you and you're just one of our most popular podcasts around here you get a lot of hits so thank you for that final question before you go what are you are you focused on anything in particular research wise that maybe we'll talk about next month or anything that's really have your has your interest yeah I'm trying to put together a more systematic picture of how serotonin fits into stress and aging the it probably is a point for intervention to reduce sickness autoimmunity and age-related degenerative conditions I think aiming towards lowering serotonin is [1:44:50] going to be one of the most productive things I see research moving in that direction contrary to the powers of the pharmaceutical industry which went to still say serotonin is wonderful stuff you should buy or are antidepressants but there there are alternative antidepressants being demonstrated to be safer while lowering serotonin and promoting health rather than degrading health so that's the research you're working just off the top do do we did I ask you sorry if I if I did some natural ways to lower the serotonin did we did we talk about that yeah we've already covered a lot of them of thyroid vitamin D calcium sugar and the things in [1:45:57] orange juice oh good all our favorite things yeah calcium and orange juice vitamin D yeah good well dr. p thanks for being here and what we'll see in about a month or so and maybe we'll have more to talk about serotonin dr. p's website is rapepeat.com and we'll have a link to that and also write to a place where you can sign up for a for a it's at every other month the how much does your does your love 28 dollars by email 20 for how long i have two years that's good for you oh so every other month you get 12 issues for 28 dollars good job all right dr. p thank you for being here we'll see you real soon okay okay thank you yes sir bye bye
