---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Tryptophan
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-191115-tryptophan.mp3
  mirrors:
    - https://wiki.chadnet.org/kmud-191115-tryptophan.mp3
    - https://github.com/0x2447196/raypeatarchive/blob/main/transcripts/kmud-191115-tryptophan.vtt
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-18"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-18"
ray-peat-rodeo:
  prev-paths:
    - /tryptofan
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to this month's Ask Europe doctor. My name is Andrew Murray From 7 30 and to 8 o'clock the end of the show. We do a live or I do a live calling I say we because Dr. Raymond Pete Always joins us and has done for several years now The number of you on the reaches I'd love to hear from you about either tonight's subjects continuing topic of serotonin inflammation superoxide oxidants antioxidants and Several other subjects, but the number is 707 923 3911 For those of you who perhaps have never heard dr. Pete We'll be giving out his details at the end of the show and for those of you who know a Lot about him and listen to lots of what he's got to say and read his books I'm sure you'll find this evening show just as informative [1:01] It's a once a month show that we do from 7 to late p.m. And from 7 30 until 8 o'clock. We do a live call in so If people want to call him with questions related or unrelated to this non-subject on continuing topic of inflammation serotonin Etc. Number is 707 923 3911 so from 7 30 on and if people want to Line up ahead of time before that. That's just fine, too. Because that also happens So once again, I'm very pleased to welcome introduce dr. Raymond Pete onto the show dr. Pete your brothers Yes, okay. Thanks so much for giving your time again. As you always do every third Friday of the month for us For those people who perhaps have never heard you or heard your name heard you speak or know anything about you Perhaps would you just outline your professional and academic background and then we'll get into tonight's topic Okay I got a master's degree with a thesis on William Blake from University of Oregon 1960 [2:05] and then taught various schools and colleges And in 1968 Went back for a PhD in biology University of Oregon graduating in 72 And I've been following up on pretty much the same interests ever since the 50s studying How the brain and body work Okay, thank you. I was going to ask I wanted to ask I didn't Didn't prepare this ahead of time But when when did you stop seeing people in person because you used to consult with people, right? Um, yeah, about 1990 I think it was. Yeah Okay. All right. Uh, well, I just wanted to let people know also that's something I should have done at the very beginning of the show because I often find myself wondering what month it was the show was done in It's November. So November the 15th 2019 [3:09] um, so dr. Pete carrying on from where we left off last month Talking about or discussing parts of your newsletter, but and it's a small part of it because we didn't get a lot of time to to cover it Excuse me, but I had um some more questions in about um tryptophan and serotonin And given that serotonin is formed from this amino acid tryptophan If we are to if we to avoid this like because the whole the whole Ages of this is that Serotonin is an inflammatory molecule It's responsible for many negative effects in the body And obviously we'll get you to outline all of those things in detail here. So people can understand just how You know just how bad it is for you and and its negative effects And why the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are so bad for you. Uh, given that they allow this product to remain in larger concentrations in the body [4:11] How best how best can we avoid tryptophan ingestion uh In order to try and get an edge on the serotonin that would be formed from it uh tryptophan and its metabolites including serotonin is essential for life Every kind of organism Is built with proteins containing tryptophan and The very nature of life As I see it and as uh, Albert St. Georgie Researched it He for the last 30 40 years of his life Was demonstrating the electronic nature of life Uh, the uh, fluorescence luminescence uh electronic conductivity and such of [5:15] living systems at the proteins interacting with water producing excited electrons and light emissions and tryptophan Is the amino acid that gives proteins that basic property that according to St. Georgie uh, it is the the essential mechanism of life that that lets it sense and move He was a muscle researcher among other things and uh This electronic property Is at the heart of both sensation and movement and all of the other Uh, familiar properties of life, uh, secretion, consciousness and so on uh, so it's a When when something goes wrong with tryptophan or its metabolites [6:19] It disturbs life at its deepest level Cell division and all all other functions depend on this excitability of tryptophan and uh the In the muscle protein myosin for example There's one particular tryptophan, which is most sensitive electronically and To to uh, light interactions such as phosphorescence Uh, and this Tryptophan interacts electrically or electronically with cysteine Which is an oxidizable sulfur protein and these are the sort of the electric motor of all the life processes [7:20] and uh They happen to be the essential things during the growth process of an organism, but If you keep the same ratio coming in in your diet and Stop growing They are no longer being Consumed in proportion for growth and so they become sort of free actors which can spread excitability and oxidizability Randomly in the organism. So during the growth period of an organism You need the full balanced range of amino acids But when when your body growth stops all you need to maintain The the renewal of your skin [8:23] and intestine lining lungs All of the turnover Brain proteins that are being renewed and so on That's a very small amount of of growth. It's going on compared to in your infancy and teens Those those amino acids Are are now at risk of becoming random excitatory inflammation promoting processes and It happens that gelatin is a major protein that is used for building frameworks connective tissues and it has a complete lack of these excitable proteins cysteine methionine and tryptophan and so if it [9:23] becomes a major a dietary protein when growth is completed then you reduce the the risk of the inflammatory and degenerative diseases Do you think this could be mitigated through? I mean, I know you don't at all promote any aerobic exercise or stress inducing exercise, but given that I can come from a kind of not that I am but I come from a kind of bodybuilding perspective where you do recommend lightweight bearing exercise for people of all ages and actually very much Support is used for producing muscle mass muscle burning glucose being thyroid thyroid stimulatory and supportive If these amino acids are being consumed and somebody's actually doing some work then Does that would that warrant that diet remaining that way because obviously there's an ideal [10:23] in life and you've mentioned the gelatin and it being completely absent from these inflammatory amino acids, but in terms of a balanced diet that would contain some of these Would you recognize work doing work like lifting small weights and exercising your body is Yeah, by the age of 30 or 40 when growth is completed The bulk of our energy is spent just in maintaining the body but It has to function to be maintained and renewed if you Have a cast for example on your arms muscles will atrophy because they aren't being used But so just to maintain of what we have We have to be active and that includes mental or spiritual activity [11:26] keeping a freshness of perspective This is the The environmental enrichment and Yeah, yeah stimulation of everything mental processes as well as as Very physical activity. Do you think there's a place for people to get more? It's kind of outside the context of this month's show, but I guess a leading question from what you're saying, but in terms of people Doing things that hopefully they're interested in obviously outside the mundanity of work if they're not interested in that but they have to do it but actively actively engaging and pursuing things that require them to be mobile and engaging with the environment and Yeah, environmentally enriching them to be a process that is supportive to the organism in terms of You know producing good [12:28] I don't know not just feelings, but good good good results in terms of Feeling fulfilled and that fulfillment transferring into a mind-body state that's supportive rather than degenerative and reductive You know it always has to involve Nouness and invention Even conversations can be relatively athletic Okay, all right, you're listening to ask you Herb doctor uncamed ego of all 91.1 FM and from 730 until the end of the show Eight o'clock you invited to call in the number to reach us here is 707 923 3911 And I just got to ask the engineer actually the clock is missing. There isn't worse. What happened to the clock? I didn't actually go check in there to make sure the clock was there. It's actually not here I suppose we should put that on our checklist. Well, I'm not a bad idea I'll start like going like that when you get towards the end and I'll start doing the music very quietly I just want to make sure that yeah, no attention. The music will get loud and noodle [13:31] Just want to make sure that we have timely intervals remind people Well, I will I will say opens. I will open the lines for calls that have passed. How about that? Sure. Okay So dr. Pete carrying on about tryptophan now, you've always mentioned that this should be in balance And that's why you've always talked about gelatin gelatin rich products because it's in The muscle meats where we get the greatest proportion of tryptophan and that would be You know consuming excess amounts of muscle meats, and I think you've don't Rate more than four ounces or six ounces As being beneficial for us because of the tryptophan content um, yeah, so It's I guess it's possible to To avoid and again, this is kind of a little bit off topic, but I was uh, I looked at a program that was um About plant-based and I don't want to get into a discussion necessarily about plant-based versus animal-based proteins But it was quite an interesting documentary about and I think they followed [14:33] Several people maybe four or five Quote unquote athletes obviously because I think they're at the top of their game But these people were either vegan or just basically got all of their protein from non animal sources. It was all plant-based proteins and um, they You and McGregor actually was a I don't you don't have to know him of course, but he's like an MMA fighter and uh, he was at the top of his game and he was uh fighting a title bout that was going to challenge him for his title and um, the chat that he was fighting was a was a vegan and In the interview, McGregor was really castigating him and saying that he was you know, just a plant eating, you know whatever he was weak and he was going to destroy him in the fight and um McGregor lost and it was such a shock in the circle because he was at the top of his game and um They proved they were doing this physiologically showing that meat consumption. I'm not anti meat at all You know, but they were showing that consumption of meat [15:35] Actually slowed the organism down and it actually I know you've mentioned things like cadaverine and putrosine as being byproducts of meat And definitely which is why you advocate not hanging meat You know like they do in england, perhaps or hang pheasants until they start falling apart and same with their You know the victim had a venison But um, anyway getting getting back to this um title fight They said that they showed physiologically how it was slowing him down and that how his muscles were not able to uh repolarize react as repair as quickly and recover as quickly And they were saying that it was pretty much based on his diet and they were really They were really putting meat consumption down But I don't know if I think the high phosphate content relative right the calcium is a big part of that if Wastes the energy It's like a constant subliminal stimulus that Tends to load the cells up with calcium [16:39] As if they were fatigued already I mean would you uh, would you be supportive of a plant-based protein diet over getting any kind of meats because I know you've you know You're really uh, you stand very strongly behind gelatin and well the problem is that a lot of the plant-based proteins are either Overloaded with phosphate the same as meat Or or they have potential allergens and Molecules that the plants Have that no no animal has right so you just you still advocate Very simple amino acid type Gelatin protein sources and then obviously things from dairy Cheese milk and eggs as good quality clean proteins Yeah, but it's a tremendously important field for research to find what plants have have the proper nutrients and [17:41] Don't have the toxins right so like you say They nearly always see the conjugated with the oils the liquid oils or the you know polyunsaturates from the nuts and Yeah, then there's other sources obviously tofu and soy soy protein has been Implicated with having kind of estrogenic effects As well as high phosphate. Yeah, okay. All right, so anyway, so getting back to um Getting back to what we were talking about with tryptophan and serotonin um, I wanted to ask about And this will be this will branch out a little bit later into uh insulin resistance and cholesterol production and Yeah, I kind of just go in a few different directions But I try and keep it as focused as possible that superoxide dismutase then this is an enzyme that degrades Superoxide and superoxide sold Uh, you know is a health food supplement and it's an extreme oxidant, correct? [18:47] Yes, and so and so very damaging and I know last month I asked you just to um break down the oxidation anti-oxidation Kind of concept because we're bombarded with these I mean, obviously vitamin C is an antioxidant and we know vitamin C is very good But there's also antioxidant effects that are not necessarily positive, correct? Oh, oh, yeah too much of an antioxidant It is typical cancer metabolism. For example, right good Okay, so then that cancer metabolism is a lactic acid producing Physiology Yeah as a byproduct. Yeah, okay All right, so, um, let's move on then to uh, talk about proteins In terms of muscle building and that kind of thing, but um, most proteins contain tryptophan then which is converted to serotonin Um, and do you think it's possible to contain enough non-tryptophan containing proteins for continued muscle growth and repair? [19:54] um All of the proteins other than gelatin that I know of Will will support proper growth and repair. Right. Okay. All right. It's fairly straightforward then. All right, and then, um Let's have a look here. I wanted to ask you about the pH of the blood and I know there are people Especially on the internet if you're looking for any kind of guidelines for health or health related topics They'll talk about acidity and alkalinity And I know the pH of the blood is kept very tightly between 7.35 and 7.45 I think um How much can this change? I mean, it's not really possible for that to change. Is it but oh, yeah, I've seen Very sick people with extremely high blood pH 7.5 or 6 for example, okay, really? [20:54] Okay, is it can it can go outside of that range? I thought the body did everything it can to keep it It does a person has to get really sick for the blood to change outside that range Okay, and and um, you can do it momentarily just by hyperventilating Blowing breathing so fast that your um carbon dioxide is being lost And that can push your your blood pH very high to the point that you might faint or die When when you lose too much CO2 the increased pH tends to cause spasms Including blood vessel spasms cutting off the circulation of your brain Can you do the opposite of that? Because I know you're uh an advocate of Increasing CO2. Yeah, we're breathing in a paper bag for example [21:55] You can correct out and lower the pH of your blood To the to the point that it can start weakening your muscles and causing Too much vasodilation Right, so it is possible to go the other direction equally and oppositely Yeah, muscle weakness is Yeah, the worst thing that happens. All right. There's nothing too much more serious than that because I know some people are really really getting into CO2 baths and rebreathing CO2's in a kind of uh, yeah, if you're just soaking it in through your skin Since you're breathing in the ordinary air Uh Even though you're absorbing a really large amount of it through your skin It's going to Equalize with the air and so you can't overdose sitting in pure CO2. Okay. All right Can I uh, I wanted to move on again just to reiterate this for some people perhaps [22:56] I'm not too sure The connection was made quite as clearly as this but I was looking at um I was looking at some articles today just going through some material to see what else could be fleshed out with this evening's talk carrying on from last month, but Uh statins are we are we're going to get one about statins again, but just uh, just to mention again that the uh brain actually creates its own cholesterol and cholesterol Systemically is too big a molecule to get across the blood-brain barrier and I know I asked you last month about the blood-brain barrier and how Physiologically intact it was and I know that you mentioned several Several components that wouldn't typically get across a blood-brain barrier could in certain instances, and I think a little bit like the intestinal barrier Yeah, fairly large fats can massively go into the brain Uh Well, they escaping from the blood [23:57] Interesting. Okay. So you say some fairly large fats, but you don't think that cholesterol will pass the blood-brain barrier. Do you? Um, I yeah, I think it can Given the right Wow Okay, because I what I what I wanted to say was that um in so far as the literature is concerned I'm not saying the literature has it right and you don't but so far as the literature is concerned That that molecules they say is too big to get across the blood-brain barrier and and hence Uh, whatever the biological reason for however long we've been around the brain Because it is such a both energy hungry organ And because the white matter of the brain is principally cholesterol They say that 20 of the body's cholesterol is actually in the brain And presumably because of the white matter and presumably because of the insulating effect of cholesterol on the neurons and that The enzyme HMG CoA reductase [25:00] produces cholesterol And that statins for those people unfortunately who might be using them But hopefully they'll look to an alternative if they don't completely ban them But they probably won't because they're making too much money from it um This the statins do pass and cross into the blood-brain barrier so I imagine what they do to the brain is what they do to the muscles and if you're soaked in statins and do vigorous exercise the Interference with cholesterol can cause your muscle to break down and simply dissolve and disintegrate And I'm afraid that same thing can happen in the brain accounting for the depression Suicidality and such right because they're saying they're saying that these are some of the common side effects that they advertise as part of their disclaimer for the products that But just to bring out again from a kind of a simplistic maybe mechanistic point that [26:06] The fact that you have this statin crossing into the brain and actually lowering your brain's brain's cholesterol Is a definite reason a cause for concern because typically um If you had a low cholesterol situation, which was not actually, um, you know due to of just an inherently high Genetic reason for producing cholesterol that if you start lowering it systemically and this is crossing into your brain and your brain is suffering as a Result of this you're going to get some very Very odd neurological side effects of it The old brain is sort of like A clump of atherosclerosis It's uh got lots of cholesterol, but it's bound fatty acids And in in the old brain free cholesterol is actually lower than in the young brain It's the bound up interfering type of cholesterol [27:08] That accumulates in the aged brain as in the aged blood vessels But your brain is not like that, is it? Avoiding vegetable oils A long time Good. All right, you're listening to out of no idea what time it is, but you're Oh, okay. There you go. You're listening to ask your ebdote to kMuD galval 91.1 FM And from now on to eight o'clock you're invited to call in the questions. So dr. Raymond p Is our guest and the number if you live in the areas or if you even if you don't live out in the area If you live anywhere on the planet, it's seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one um I looked at to read your counting. Okay, it's expecting the phone to start ringing. Okay, so I was looking at some some Articles of self-new and I saw an article about hand cell you which you mentioned Quite a lot saying that um, he was doing work on muscular dystrophy [28:08] And by administering serotonin to animals. This was this was uh caused. He actually gave a he could precipitate muscular dystrophy in animals um, uh, yeah, and uh That was in the late 50s and early 60s that he was doing those experiments and uh despite that being in the literature in the 70s tryptophan supplements became a popular fad and there was a lot of Sickness produced by it I think there were mental problems, but muscle inflammation and an immune problem was the Focus of the disease that became well-known and the fga Blamed it on on a bad [29:09] type of tryptophan that they'd never explained but Han cell you was producing it with At tryptophan simply in excess Yeah Okay, all right. We have a we have a caller on the on the line. So Let's take this call a call away from what's your question? Hi, good evening. I'm calling from stanah barbara, california. Hi, welcome to the show Thank you. Um, I just had a question. Are you familiar with the hair tissue mineral analysis test? Yep, dog's feet. Go on. Yeah Okay, great. I just had some results of that and my first question was is I have a very high sodium to potassium potassium ratio my my um sodium is 34 and my potassium is 1 I just wanted to know what could be causing that and What do you do about it? What's it the hair analysis? Yeah, I had to have [30:11] It could be that you Have hard water or have a water softener that puts sodium into the water Yes, santa barbara has water softeners in lots of the houses Do you have do you have a water softener in your house? Yes, I do. Yeah, okay, that puts sodium into the water and so it will skew the hair test Ah, okay um, and then just one more on those um I have a the ratio between the calcium and the potassium is It's very skewed as well. My calcium is 46 and the potassium is 1 I'm I'm not sure that that could be uh from hard water rather than softened water, but uh, I wouldn't worry about a Hair mineral test a serum test is much more useful right Yeah, there you go. It's it's basically anything that you're exposed to that. Dr. Pete mentioned in the first instance here [31:16] If you're showering and your water's been uh softened that way Then that could easily explain how the hair would take up those components and would show to be High in one and low in another but um, obviously blood tests are the best way to do it Okay, did did you have any particular reason for testing your hair or was this just uh curiosity? Uh, no. Yeah, I am working like with a functional nutritionist and I've um Had the dutch hormone testing done previously and I've had some Uh stool sampling done and so as we progress kind of trying to figure out the puzzle pieces of my symptoms Um, this was another um This test was recommended by her. Yeah Do you do you feel like you want to talk about what it was you were looking for help for or? Oh, sure. Yeah. I um, basically uh, a couple years ago. I started having symptoms of Um hypoglycemia, which I still have now and how old are you? [32:20] I'm 46. Okay. Go carry on. Sorry Yeah, so I've had that I've had um, basically increased Weight gain during these last couple years. I've gained probably about 40 pounds Um, I have changed my diet significantly. That was obviously a big problem for me. But my my diet is very um Uh, I follow a lot of dr. Pete's recommendations my uh, my practitioner follows his work. So, um, I've You know done a lot of those changes and everything but Basically, I have like hypoglycemia. I have problems with anxiety. Um, my inflammation marker is very high um, and then like I said the weight gain and my hormones indicate, um, I have high cortisol So those are all kind of things that we've been trying to work on Okay, dr. Pete hypo glycemia with high cortisol And weight gain and anxiety and anxiety. Yeah [33:23] And calcium and and thyroid Are likely involved vitamin D calcium and thyroid Have you have you had your vitamin D measured? Do you know what that is or Yes, um, the most recent one I've had done. I want to say it was around 50 ish. Okay. That's good. All right And then the then the amount of calcium in your diet Works with both thyroid and vitamin D to keep your metabolic rate up and your blood sugar steady Okay Two two grams a day of calcium is is a good level Do you drink any milk or do you take a calcium supplement or? Um, I don't take a calcium supplement But I do drink milk and I do eat high quality dairy. How much milk do you drink? Um I was well, I've increased that [34:25] Per dr. Pete. So I mean for me probably about 16 ounces and I'm drinking um, two percent milk. Yeah I think uh twice that much of one percent would be better Uh, uh two two quarts of skimmed or one percent Helps to lose weight because of the high calcium content And you said about like what did you say on the ounces? From 32 quarts to two quarts Oh, okay. One to two quarts of okay skim more than one percent. Okay And that tends to increase your temperature And if your temperature doesn't uh rise quickly in the morning when you get up and eat breakfast If it doesn't get up to 98.6 by Half hour after breakfast But then you're likely to Need a thyroid supplement too [35:27] Yeah, I do I do do the temperatures and pulses and I I tend to have low temperatures um And then I did I did try um Some nature throid um a very like Of the like the lowest dosage. I forget the like quarter grain or Something like that, but I started having um more negative effects with it I started having like my anxiety was more increased and I started having like more aggressive Like behavior like a real short fuse and that kind of stuff. So I quit taking that after about a month I'm One of the effects of Thyroid is to make yourselves able to retain the magnesium that they need And um if your diet doesn't have enough magnesium And and two quarts of milk would give you [36:27] generous supply of magnesium Which would make the thyroid able to work more quickly And the the normal function of thyroid is to increase your ability to relax both both muscles and and nerves Okay Okay, I appreciate your time. Thank you both so much. Yeah, you're welcome Okay, so uh, people want to call in numbers seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one, uh, dr. Raymond pete's with us in the studio Okay, um, so dr. P Going back to the Going back to positive effects and we've mentioned it's positive. It's only ever positive, but it's demonized um in the industry in terms of treatments For lowering it cholesterol's effect is un Undoubtable in terms of regulating Regulating the the system regulating and supporting and stabilizing cells [37:30] Let me just okay. There's a call on the line Let's get this call before we jump into this next question caller. You're on the airway from I'm from minnesino county. Okay. Hi. What's your question? I question that I just recently diagnosed with osteoporosis and uh, I was wanting an alternative way to treat that. Yeah, how how old are you? 62 62. Okay. There's plenty of good plenty of good ways to do this, but let dr. Pete Let dr. Pete discuss it go ahead dr. Pete. Okay Keeping keeping the parathyroid hormone under control is essential and uh Eating a lot of calcium Like two quarts of milk And keeping your your vitamin D serum level up to the middle of the range like 50 ng per ml That Is a good basis, but if your thyroid hormone is low [38:32] Then your your pro pro lacton will likely be High enough that the pro lacton itself has a bone weakening effect Pro lacton is normally the the hormone of lactation And it takes calcium out of the bone Uh, normally to put into milk but uh under stress it causes calcium to be lost from the bone and pro lacton tends to rise along with thyroid stimulating hormone and uh Simplest way to to normalize pro lacton Is to normalize your thyroid function Keep keep your thyroid stimulating hormone at the lower end of the normal range Okay, how do you keep the thyroid? How do you do that? [39:33] If you can't do it just with a selection of foods Then a supplement A thyroid supplement. Um, yeah Yeah, and I do not like milk. So is there something else that I could do to get calcium? Oh, uh, well, uh cooked greens are are the Food that's richest other than milk in calcium relative to phosphate but uh If you grind up egg shells That's a good pure form of calcium carbonate which is next best to milk Okay, how much how many uh ground up egg cells do you do per day? Oh, a couple of grams would be good Okay All right Yeah, so you can just use your eggs if you use eggs. You can just put them to one side and Gently wash out the membrane and stack them up for a week or so and then after a week you can put them on a baking tray [40:35] and put them in the oven at about 150 And uh, basically Sterilize them that way and then put them in a coffee grinder and then they'll grind up very finely into a fine powder Do have some people who use these? Kind of approaches to calcium rather than pills and capsules that do say that it's best taken With food it can irritate some people's stomachs But it's a very clean way, especially if we're using organic eggs To get a good quality calcium carbonate and it's almost all calcium. So Um, 2,000 milligrams a day is what dr. Pete said so two grams. It's about it's about three One eighth teaspoons. I think I think an eighth teaspoon is 650 odd milligrams Okay, so yeah, so if you don't drink milk or eat cheese or get lots of cooked greens and you are calcium Uh calcium lean then that's obviously going to work against you But can I quickly ask you what kind of menstrual history you had? Um, I hadn't I went to menopause at early age at 45 45. Yeah, all right [41:39] I just I've just spoken to a lot of women who have Either had hysterectomies and very poor hormone replacement approaches done or have had really bad menstrual cycles and been very high estrogen And a lot of these women show very early osteopenia. I mean in the 40s and then osteo Bordering osteoporotic by 50. It's not what you want. You really want to address this and vitamin d And calcium and thyroid are going to be the best least invasive and certainly most tolerable Approach to dealing with your osteoporosis because you're only young And uh, you know, hopefully you're going to live quite a while longer and it's going to It's not going to get any better if you don't address it. I'm unopposed cortifal. Yeah other bone dissolving Or what is that? Uh, cortisol If it's even in the higher part of the normal range In a morning test If it isn't balanced with the [42:41] adrenal DHEA And progesterone and other adrenal steroids That can can contribute to osteoporosis and supplementing progesterone and DHEA And or pre-pregnant alone Can oppose that effect of cortisol Okay, all right. Thank you very much dr. Pete Okay, good. So the number if you live anywhere on the planet and you'd like to ask dr. Pete a question during this evening's call Ending at eight o'clock here with seven zero seven nine two three three nine one seven zero seven nine two three nine one one uh, so dr. Pete just getting back to um cholesterol for a little bit um in terms of What has been so popularized and so treated with statins? uh, cholesterol's positive effects I think just beginning to come to pass, you know, and I think it's a little bit like a sea change that's [43:44] occurred with the Whole perpetration of polyunsaturates supposedly being good for you and saturated fats being bad view Which is I think now at last Finally seeing the light of day And I'm reading reports on the internet. I'm not saying the internet is the only sole source of any information but Seeing some good articles coming out about How that is just so I know you've been talking about it for 40 years or more. I'm sorry that is taken So long for everybody, you know, including us 10 years ago. We're still thinking that that's the way it was but I Also starting to see some good articles that have been written um Expounding the benefits of cholesterol and just outlining in very plain simple layman terms just how beneficial cholesterol is and why it's so important And that the whole ldl hdl thing is a complete myth And they're actually a lot more studies showing that some of these oxidized ldl particles are probably more responsible for the inflammatory Initial insult on the endothelia of the vessels that then causes [44:47] Cholesterol to be laid down as a repair mechanism, which during dissection of a cadaver who's died of a heart attack, for example They'll say oh, that's it may see here. I here's a cholesterol. It's blocked the arteries. That's why he's dead When actually all the time the new voice said it's initial insult from things like lipofuscin Or other oxidative byproducts of lipid metabolism that have caused initial insult But in terms of the brain and the brain's functioning um, so cholesterol is I can't we can't really can't really state it enough just how important it is to have adequate cholesterol and that low cholesterol Is virtually unspoken about people you find it very hard to find any information regarding low cholesterol because no one's looking that way And I wonder just how many people Actually present with a blood test and their doctors saying oh your cholesterol is great, you know Whenever I've had that blood work done and my cholesterol is probably 120 at the moment Um, it's always wow your cholesterol is great. And I'm thinking no, it's not it's nowhere near high enough [45:50] You know, and I know you've always said that you should be about 200 So a cholesterol of 120 is obviously not good for me Um, but yeah, it's not at all influenced by diet And in terms of your body will make cholesterol out of just about anything Yeah Okay, there's a caller on the end. Let's let's get this caller. I call you up. Yeah, where are you from? What's your name? My name is john and uh, I'm 78 over the last Year or maybe a little more I guess uh, my pfA's gone up. Okay precipitously. Yeah From four to five to 20. Okay And I wonder if there's any supplements that can help me drive that down. Yeah Talk to p. It's probably not in isolation for this, but this person's psa Is 20 now um I I think everything anti-inflammatory Is the right approach [46:51] A diet low in phosphate is a very basic anti-inflammatory thing And so Um the um Cooked cooked greens cheese milk and eggs are anti-inflammatory foods Keeping your thyroid function up so that your Your liver is is helping to balance your hormones keeping estrogen down adequate protein a good calcium phosphate ratio and Fairly High Normal a body temperature is important To lower inflammation and to keep the ratio of estrogen low [47:54] Do you think dr. Pete from a from an herbal medicine perspective the kind of rationale of using aromatase inhibitors from things like nettle root or using the sterols Probably from sore palmetto might be anti-estrogenic and that's how That could be a rationale for treating high Prosthetic hypertrophy if you do you think high prosthetic hypertrophy is down to Estrogens as much as anything else. Um, yeah estrogen It is a growth and carcinogenic factor In the prostate right and now as men get older their estrogen no doubt rises especially as testosterone is on the decline Yeah, and the men who live the longest with prostate cancer have the highest testosterone What? The men that live the longest yeah with prostate cancer have the highest testosterone Yeah, so in that okay. Yeah, so that the testosterone the testosterone that in that point and it's kind of protective [49:00] Yeah, and in the early 90s when They started using the psa test as a diagnosis of prostate cancer the mortality from prostate cancer Took a huge surge upward and Some of the doctors noticed that and decided maybe it wasn't a good idea to diagnose prostate cancer Right because a lot of the times you have said this quite a few times before now But a lot of the times it can are not advocating people just don't do anything about a supposed cancer marker That is, you know, possibly a treatable especially from a medical perspective But you've you've mentioned quite a few times that people Found in in the mortuary They've just died from some other cause and they've been found with a wide range of different cancers That hasn't been the thing that's killed them or they've been found with prostate Enlargement and or you know benign type dysplastic prosthetic inflammation [50:02] A couple studies found that a hundred percent of of people Who died at the age of 50 or more? Uh all of them had diagnosable cancer some right. Yeah. Yeah So the the the call it the the best thing the best things for you Talking about what dr. Pete's been mentioning If you can obviously Maintain physical activity in terms of keeping a testosterone as high as you can from being a male That's certainly very protective and anti estrogenic estrogen being one of those Hormones that rises in males, especially in males that are obese or you know They have more fat than is good for them Especially because of that tissue tends to accumulate and or produce estrogen in its own right And then there are two herbs that I know there's more than that But the two that come to mind instantly are things like nettle root has an aromatase inhibitor and that's uh has an effect blocking estrogen And then the sore palmetto extract but there's lots of there's lots of information about [51:07] alternative medicines for enlarged prostate Um, but I think obviously keeping an eye on your your PSA In conjunction with using some of those herbs that have been used for prosthetic enlargement and Making sure that your estrogen is being opposed by testosterone and getting exercise And aspirin is a neuromallus in there. There you go And aspirin certainly something that's very well tolerated very inexpensive and very easily to get hold of Okay, we do have one more caller on the air. So let's get this next caller caller. You're on the airway from him. What's your question? I'm in uh, Humboldt and redway. Okay. My question is how can I get off selector? Okay, uh, we had we had a very similar question uh last month about a lady who called in Uh on SSRI's um and wanted wanted help with that. So um in terms of in terms of a dose have you ever tried reducing the dose of this and then um slowly withdrawing from it [52:12] Um, I would be willing to try that. Yeah It's one. I mean dr. P in terms of withdraw. We've we talked about this last month. So in terms of withdrawing From an SSRI it's not to be done unsupported. Um, but you mentioned last month that there's Plenty to do in terms of support in the physiology with thyroid with other you know positive lifestyle diet changes that Basically will allow a person to slowly taper off of an SSRI and not be Not be basically overloaded with uh, this this product serotonin One of their effects Tends to um increase the stress hormones And so an anti stress program I've I've known people to withdraw from uh several different addictive things including the SSRI's using progesterone [53:12] and coffee and thyroid and a good high calcium diet for example Yeah How long have you been using it for? Many years. Yeah. Yeah. I mean obviously it's uh I'm it's unfortunate that we're getting so close to the top of the hour and the end of the show but in terms of um It's used for the treatment of anxiety and depression etc etc and all the label recommendations that are given for prescribing it in the first place In terms of your headspace and uh where you are and what you're engaged with what stimulates you or what You know upsets you even um, there's certainly scope there for Yeah, lifestyle changes, but um as dr. Peaks mentioned, you know in terms of anti stress things There are certainly components that in your diet are anti stress and that support your thyroid and are anti inflammatory and Decrease the quote unquote stress. Uh, which is on you know [54:15] On Like lifestyle changes that like go out and run or walk every day No, we're not running for sure, but in terms of uh, gentle weight-bearing exercise I'm walking and reading and being in the sunlight, you know or in a bright room Making sure you've got exposure to that good red light etc etc Especially in the winter now we're coming with a long day long nights and short days and the whole Seasonal effective disorder being a fairly widespread thing in this part of the world as Thyroid gets low as the winter's coming Miss thyroid hormone and then there's opposing your estrogen as a female which undoubtedly will have a beneficial effect And keeping up vitamin D. Yeah How are hormone replacement therapy? No, not a big As I could have hormone replacement therapy Well, the only hormone would be progesterone to oppose your estrogen that If you're on any kind of hormone replacement, that's estrogen based and you really don't want to be doing that It's uh, it's completely not what you're going to hear from your doctor. Perhaps, you know, or maybe some [55:20] naturopath who's a little more current Yeah, I I don't even have a clock in front of me. What what time is it Michael? I guess it's that time. I'm afraid because I told music where you wrap up Yeah, I mean you've got a minute to say goodbye to dr. Pete. All right. Thank you so much dr. Pete for joining us Okay, if that lady wants to contact us any any time afterwards, um, basically you can just email me My email address is andrew at western botanicalmedicine.com Um, so yeah, go ahead and email me. Uh, I'll respond to your email next week. Uh, I want to get back in the office on Monday Um, okay, so for those who've listened. Thanks for joining in the show. Um our same third friday of next month, um, december And uh, for those people who've listened to dr. Pete, uh, want to find out more about him www.raypeat.com I've got plenty of well written articles that are fully backed up by Studies that you can just go ahead and look out on the internet. So uh, people want alternatives. They want some, uh, hope [56:24] Definitely a good thing to have and uh, very positive. There's lots of alternatives So don't have to be forced down one particular way to do something. Anyway, until uh, next month Oh, I just wanted to mention that in january Uh, sarah will be back So for all those people all those people who keep saying uh, where's sarah? Where's sarah? Uh, anyway, uh, thanks so much for joining until next month
