---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: 'Brain "Barriers"'
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-191018-brain-barriers.mp3
  kind: audio
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-18"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-18"
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Rep Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. This is the October 2019 broadcast for the last 10 years. I think it's actually been just over 10 years. We've been doing our monthly, 7 till 8 p.m., call-in, given the loose topic of alternative holistic medicine, with Dr Ray Pete. Now, for those of you who've never heard him, we'll be introducing Dr Pete in a moment. For those of you who do know him, and have read his articles, his newsletters, the books that he's written, or if you've been fortunate enough to attend any of the lectures that he's given after graduating, [1:01] you'll understand that he is a pretty deep thinker. Over the last 10 years, we've covered a wide range of topics on health, alternative health, biosciences, and all those subjects around it. And Dr Pete has a pretty broad education background understanding of physiological processes, and we're very fortunate to have his input on the show. The lines are open. It's a live call-in show from 7.30 to 8.00. 7.30 to 8.00. People are invited to call in with any questions related to the continuing topic of false narratives, misconceptions about things we're told are one way, but actually, when we look at the science, they're actually not. And a continuing part of Dr Pete's writing over his newsletters on serotonin. The number, [2:07] if you'd like to call in after 7.30, it's 707-923-3911. Once again, 707-923-3911. My background has been in herbal medicine. I graduated in 1999 and have since practiced herbal medicine and researched and developed best methods. And in the last 10 years, I've been working with Dr Pete, getting his input on challenging cases and other cases that were largely not responding. But I think in retrospect now, certain elements of an approach to that were missing at the time. And myself, like many other people who did a mainstream medical herbal medicine education in England, pretty much got the facts presented to them erroneously. [3:12] And not all of it erroneously, but a lot of fairly pivotal and foundational parts of physiology that are just not accurate. So let's go ahead and introduce Dr Pete. Dr Pete, you're with us. Hi. Okay, thanks for joining us. For those people who perhaps have not heard you or your work and your background, your life, would you just give us a rundown of your academic and professional background before we get started? My first teaching job happened to be in biology, but I had been studying linguistics and the humanities, and mostly was teaching in those areas for about 10 years after getting my master's degree. Then I went back to get a PhD in biology, University of Oregon, 1968 to 72. I was there. And since then, I've been following up on interests [4:16] I had all through the 1960s in biology, brain function, and how social interaction and environmental influences affect our biology. Okay, thank you. Just before we do get started, can I ask the engineer if there's anything that can be done? Because I noticed last month, and I think it's happened before now, there's quite a hum on the line. And when I listen to the audio archives, that hum is very, I can try calling them back and see if we get a different, a different line. Would you like me to try that? That hums coming directly from that line. Yeah, you're using is it? Yeah. Oh, I don't know how much, how much mileage there is. And I'm just wondering if there's any feedback in the studio or not. Oh, no, it's not online. We'll keep going. And then maybe sometime halfway through, we can quickly swap over and see if it makes a difference. But I can actually, I can, do you have two lines on this number? I'm calling Dr. Pete, because I can try calling from one of the other studio lines where you're on. Do you have call waiting? [5:17] No, I don't. Okay, well, if it gets unbearable, we will try calling again. And maybe from a different line. Callers, when the people call in, it's sometimes very difficult to hear them because there's a lot of humming. Believe it or not, they have a harder time hearing you. All right, well, without any further ado, only the dedicated call in. All right. And there's a lot of them. Okay. All right, well, once again, let's put that number at 707-923-3911. Okay, so Dr. Pete, again, the kind of the misconceptions, things that we're told are a certain way we find out they're not. And it becomes ingrained in our minds, and our psyche, and people repeat it often. Blood-brained barrier. I mean, I always, when I was studying physiology, I was told that the Pia Marta, the Dura Marta and the Arachnoid Marta formed those meninges, and that the blood-brained barrier existed to keep certain pathogens and toxins out, [6:22] although I know things like cysts can get into the brain, and they're certainly a pathogen. What's your opinion? I know you have a very fluid, very fluid understanding of the body in red blood cells, and how they definitely move around a lot, and how communication is just not the way you'd read it in a normal 21st century physiology text. But how do you understand the blood-brained barrier and its function? It relates to the general idea of integrity of tissue and cells, and when something goes wrong with a tissue, an energy failure, for example, any tissue loses its barrier function or integrity, and things that are inside leak out, things that are outside can get in, and different tissues are composed of different [7:24] degrees of fatty material and proteins, but every cell, when it's in a highly energized state, the whole cytoplasm has a fat-loving property, a hydrophobic property. The idea of a membrane barrier on the surface of a cell is really a myth. Gilbert Lange spent 40, 50 years disproving that myth, that it's really the structure of the cytoplasm that creates a barrier between any cells inside and outside, and Russian researchers in the middle of the last century showed that the energy level of the cell is what governs its barrier function. [8:27] High energy state, the cell has a lipid-loving quality, takes up fat easily, and when it's de-energized, a water-soluble dye will leak in it. That has been demonstrated for more than 100 years on simple organisms as well as tissue culture, so it's really an old idea, but about 50 years ago, someone demonstrated in rats that the lipid-loving quality of the brain is what governs the so-called barrier function. The brain has to live at a very high energy state, and in that high energy state, it's more hydrophobic or fat-loving. These researchers put an emotion of, I think it was, soil into the carotid artery of a rat, and then measured [9:35] the content of the blood coming out of the vein, draining the brain. They found that on a single pass through the brain, 17 percent of this fat was taken up from the blood, and if you mention that when you're under stress, your blood becomes loaded with unbound free fatty acids that travel on the albumin in the blood, and hormones as well as free fatty acids travel on the albumin. When you're under stress, the increased free fatty acids will displace those hormones, and the albumin delivers large amounts of [10:37] free fatty acids or fat-soluble hormones to the capillaries serving the brain. The fact that the fat solubility is what governs the entry, that was well-established, but the people still resisted the idea that hormones could freely get into the brain without having a special transporter, but as long as they're able to be carried on albumin, albumin can deliver its burden right into the brain. The water solubility of tryptophan has been one of the arguments that people insist that the huge amount of tryptophan produced in your intestine [11:41] and carried on your platelets can't get into the brain to influence your behavior, even though when people had a tumor, the carcinoid tumor, I think it was called, that produces huge amounts of serotonin, they were characteristically having emotional turmoil. There would be a surge of serotonin and their skin would show vasoconstriction and vasodilation, alternating, and their emotions would have extremes of ups and downs that went with these surges of serotonin, so there's a good medical history of the effect of intestinal serotonin getting into the brain, and serotonin [12:44] itself powerfully breaks down barriers, including the blood-brain barrier, so-called. The lungs and the brain happen to be the best equipped with enzymes that destroy serotonin, the monoamine oxidase is very concentrated in these capillaries, so normally when the blood passes through the lungs, it happens that the surge of oxygen changes the pH and carbon dioxide content and causes serotonin to be released from the platelets, where it can be destroyed by these MAO enzymes in the lining of the lung, and the same thing should happen in the brain. The MAO should be detoxifying all the serotonin [13:48] that reaches these capillaries in the brain, but under the influence of nutritional problem or too much stress where you're simply pouring out gigantic quantities of serotonin, or when your other hormones are disturbed such as high estrogen will inhibit the MAO and the capillaries fail to detoxify the serotonin, so then the serotonin is free to enter the brain and disturb the brain function. Getting that that's a very rounded, very rounded breakdown of all of the inherent activity and the problem surrounding that, does the bilipid membrane does that exist? I mean in terms of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic components of it lining up [14:52] to form this kind of barrier to either water or fat soluble components, is that accurate? I mean because I always kind of amaze me when I first started doing physiology and basic physiology and looking at cells and all the cells and the lipid membrane and looking at cholesterol. Is that lipid membrane? Is that a reality or is that again another very fluid relationship with the cell? In an old medical book from the early 19th century, I saw that the treatment for a burner and ulcer to close up the weeping wound on the surface of the body, they used osmic acid, osmium tetroxide solution and that was to create what they called [15:55] a false membrane. First use in medicine was defined as to create a false membrane. When the first electron microscopes started looking at cells, they didn't find the membrane that they had theorized had to be there and meanwhile Gilbert Lane was demonstrating why the cell behaves electrically as it does without needing a membrane. But within two or three years, someone discovered that they could make the use of this osmic acid false membrane creator and they did produce a membrane on cells ever since then they've been able to produce a membrane consistent with the current theories. At first the membrane was very thick to suit the theory of the time but as the tendency towards this [17:04] lipid bilayer membrane took root, they had to adjust their membrane making technology to suit this idea of a single bilayer. It's almost a religion. Yeah, when I was taking a course in electron microscopy, I tried out different stains, not just osmic tetroxide and found that I could make a cell look like an onion membrane solved way through. Okay, again it's a little bit off the post here but talking about electron micrographs and just looking back in the past shows that we've done in terms of viral inclusions that these things often have been shown to be completely fabricated not actually any part of any virion for example when they're looking at virology and they show you these viruses [18:06] that they are you know showing on a scanning electron micrograph for example. Yeah, Harold Hillman who died a long ago wrote some books showing how official biology is really all artefact. All right, let's stop there for a second. Okay, so you're listening to ask Europe Dr. K. M. Udy Gawavool 91.1 FM. From 7.30 to 8 o'clock you invited to call in the questions about this month's continuing subject of misconceptions and looking at serotonin inflammation and serotonin reuptake inhibitors and monoamine oxidase inhibitors and all of these things that we're told are good for you like serotonin and melatonin and they're happy hormones and actually how the science that Dr. Pete's bringing out here which has been known for quite some time is actually showing exactly the opposite but it's such a deeply rooted investment in our consciousness that it's so difficult to break away from it. [19:08] Anyway the number here if you live in or outside the area 707-923-3911. Dr. Pete getting back quickly to the blood-brain barrier you've you mentioned obviously that the brain is an extremely energy hungry organ consuming a lot of glucose and it's 90 something percent plus cholesterol correct for the white matter. I don't know what percentage okay well what I was trying to get at though for the fact that it consumes a lot of energy it's lipid rich. We've all been told at least in school when we're studying this blood-brain barrier exists as some protective mechanism to keep the contents of the regular vascular system out of the brain but obviously like I mentioned initially things like you know people patients have had brain trapanning done to remove cystic formations in the brain from pigs you know producing [20:10] a tapeworm rather producing these cysts things do get by the blood-brain barrier quite regularly and it's it's not a strictly mechanical system that prevents the ingress or egress of certain substances it's actually quite fluid and it very much depends on the energetic gosh I don't know the energetic reserves of the organism how well energized the cells are how how much energy the organism has in terms of its ability to keep things coherent. And when the energy breaks down you get diseases based on the excess permeability the breakdown of the so-called barrier multiple sclerosis and this is when you talk about estrogen producing leakiness in leaking contents and excess edema water you know uptake into cells and yeah this morning I got an email from a woman who [21:13] experienced what the myth does to the medical practice. He was found to have extremely high creatinoplasma kinase a ck or cpk enzyme in her blood as well as a very high thyroid stimulating hormone TSH. Is that cpk is that muscle breakdown by product or yeah yeah exactly and the doctor assured her that the muscle leaking at large amount of enzyme couldn't have anything to do with hypothyroidism that it must be a sign of autoimmune disease and autoimmunity is now a great medical business and fixing the thyroid function isn't of much interest but the the knowledge that hypothyroidism causes muscle [22:18] disease goes back 100 years easily it was a diagnostic basis for for considering hypothyroidism for person had swollen muscles old textbooks showed little kids with massively swollen muscles and then when they would give them a thyroid hormone muscles would go back to looking like little kids and this would be through edema water attention yeah just swelling of the muscle and that the amount of exertion that it takes to enter the muscle like if you lift a barbell too many times your muscle will get hot and swell up but if your thyroid is slow it gets hot and swells up with very little effort or no effort that makes me think again a little bit off of beaten track here for the purpose of the [23:19] show's questions I wanted to get through to you but chronic wasting disease that is an interesting an interesting definition of a process that they want to say is prevalent in the animal population here in in the states I know in England the Kreuzfeldt-Yakob disease in cows bovine spongiform encephalopathy and that whole prion supposedly based disorder that that again in terms of chronic wasting that that whole that whole physiology there seems very much like a very energy wasting process that yeah the thyroid hormone is our basic anabolic hormone yeah okay so do you do you think I mean I'm not wasn't even going to ask this question too but in terms of chronic wasting disease um what do you think what do you think is probably the the main deficit there you think that's a deficit in energy production based on thyroid or uh well around 1960 [24:21] Han Selye was working on exactly that of muscular dystrophy okay and he could experimentally produce muscular dystrophy just by giving an animal serotonin okay and when thyroid function goes down serotonin goes up and either removing the thyroid or giving serotonin or both will cause that okay energy failures that leads to a breakdown of the barrier function and leaking of of substance and eventually atrophy wow okay well I know we've got I think we have one caller who's waiting in in here okay so it's it's seven thirty basically but um people listening if you want to call in from now to eight o'clock please do the number 707-923-3911 uh we've got Dr. Raymond Pete joining us on the show and we're going to keep covering uh the parts of his newsletter on serotonin [25:26] and also tying this in with some of the misconceptions about what we've been told is you know positive and beneficial for us like serotonin and melatonin being happy hormones when actually they're very destructive and inflammatory hormones so uh yeah number two call is 707-923-3911 so let's get this first caller you're on the air call away from I'm in Trinidad California Trinidad California welcome to the show what's your question my question is is there any hope for getting off of the SSRI let the pro I have been on it for 17 years I went on it in graduate school I've tried to get off it a number of times over four months weaning periods and it triggers a withdrawal uh deep sadness that's pretty out of control and then most recently a symptom I've never experienced before which is almost like uh extreme highs and extreme lows [26:26] yeah Dr. Pete okay the lady withdrawing from SSRI is experiencing extreme sadness and the other mood related changes that SSRIs are supposedly indicated for in the first place one of the chronic effects of serotonin promotion is to interfere with cellular respiration and that should be under the control of thyroid but that gradually is depleted and the glyco glycolytic energy production tends to replace it so you have to get back to reactivate oxidative metabolism while suppressing the glycolysis and lactic acid production and carbon dioxide is a main regulator of metabolism [27:27] it helps to keep serotonin under control keep oxidation running and and suppress the production of lactic acid and working on everything connected to the thyroid function will gradually wean you away from from that stimulation that comes from the SSRI so do you do you think this particular person would be a good candidate to self assess their metabolic rate uh the temperature and their pulses um and then see from there whether or not they look like they are excuse me uh either low thyroid or not responding or the body's not responding as it would normally in a healthy individual from uh the stimulate or stimuli of thyroid hormone and then from there get to a place where they could slowly but surely use thyroid hormone along with adequate dietary sugars and withdrawal from [28:29] polyunsaturates and all the other negative things that affect thyroid function to get to a place where they could regain their proper control of their metabolism and yeah vitamin D and calcium are usually helpful to get the thyroid going again okay does that make does that make any sense do you call her yes uh is that something that um that the that your office would uh also work with somebody on or that yeah yeah we could i could work with you on that for sure okay you can you can almost contact me anytime monday through friday i'll give out the information at the end of the show but um there's i'm sure there's probably plenty that could be done for you if you've been uh you've been struggling with this this long thank you so much both of you appreciate the time i was curious about something you mentioned carbon dioxide could that be one reason why exercise improves people's mood and regular exercise helps because you're producing more carbon dioxide well you're probably producing less of it if you're um if you're working um you're [29:34] anaerobically exercising you're probably blowing off more co2 than you would if you didn't do that yeah there's evidence that too much exercise uh when when you get to the point of fatigue serotonin is the signal that creates fatigue and it can lead to the chronic fatigue syndrome which tends to go with inflamed muscles and any other symptoms it's probably the endorphins you're uh you're responding to and you say that exercise makes you feel good i think there's some of those some of those endorphins that are naturally produced as a probably as a part of a stress response to exercise like that that um probably dulls the pain of the exercise and they have looked at the blood condition of intense um like a soccer players or marathon runners and find evidence of breakdown of the blood brain barrier in all of these are very uh high stress [30:40] all right good there's two callers on the air so let's get these callers get going here so first caller you're on the air where you from and what's your question hi is this me yeah yeah wait wait what where you from i'm from utah utah okay what's your question my question is um i've got a family member who uh has been taking prednisone i think five milligrams for the past several years and uh at this point they'd like to get off of it but it seems like there were a lot on it um what would you suggest as a as a strategy to to address that yeah what were they what were they using prednisone for um for initially a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis and pain in general right dr p if somebody wants to withdraw from prednisone and it's damaging effects and they've been put on it because they've got either you know inflammatory [31:41] damage or changes and the pain etc etc for the reasons that they prescribe uh steroids what would you suggest behind the original diagnosis there was probably something like a vitamin d deficiency or low thyroid function and so you want to make sure that you're not forgetting what led to the original prescription of the drug because the rheumatoid is just an inflammatory an inflammatory arthritis so how you you'd characterize that inflammation as probably being related to things like serotonin related to just basic energy deficit serotonin is elevated in all of the autoimmune so-called right diseases and so correcting the energy problem with calcium vitamin d and thyroid is usually the basis for getting the original symptoms corrected then [32:45] you can just taper off the prednisone okay so i see um is there any uh how would you feel about addressing the prednisone use directly with with something like pregnatalone or other hormones i've known several people who accidentally got addicted to a glucocorticoid such as prednisone who used either progesterone or or pregnatalone to taper off and got off it in just a few weeks there you go good to hear thank you yeah thank you feel cool uh okay just to remind uh remind people here uh wanted to uh question dr pete again and just bring out this whole selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor just nightmare yeah poor information bad information very damaging in how the whole serotonin issue plays into cell inflammation and just basic destruction [33:48] we've got another caller on the air so let's get this next caller call you're on the airway from what's your question i'm right here in gerberville and i'll make this as quick as possible as far as i can tell what you guys are talking about make key into what i'm going through i'm going under a lot of stress lately um and certain health things have been flaring up uh aches and pains various other things and my mood has been pretty down um my question is though is kind of anecdotal um i've been craving a lot of milk like middle of the night i'll wake up feeling funky and i want milk or during the day if i want something refreshing i want milk i heard uh dr pete say vitamin d and calcium are both essential to thyroid function so i'm wondering is there a chance that my stressed out state is depressing my thyroid therefore my body is wanting more calcium and vitamin d very much so yeah dr pete yeah almost [34:51] um just disregarding the uh cause of of the stress uh all of the stress hormones rise at night just because of the darkness but any particular stress you're having will just make it worse for all of the stress hormones and serotonin happens to activate every pituitary hormone and those all rise during during the night and calcium and sugar and thyroid are the three three crucial things for minimizing that nocturnal rise of stress so basically it sounds like uh my body is trying to tell me something yeah but from a calcium and vitamin d perspective the milk would definitely be a good a good idea and like dr pete says when your stress is uh rising during the night time due to the fast of not eating [35:53] or drinking when you're asleep um milk's actually a very good i mean prior to bedtime it's a very good idea uh to consume milk and or sweet milk or custard or you know that kind of product because of the calcium content uh and in the milk uh if if it's fortified that perhaps uh the vitamin d content of the milk but that's why it's so important to make sure you get um a good source of vitamin d either calcium labs do a 4 000 i u per drop vitamin d and vitamin d is just gaining more and more traction as a panacea for a lot of different inflammatory processes because of its utility in that excellent thank you so much guys okay you're welcome okay so it's uh it's 20 to 8 the number if you want to call in it's 707-923-3911 uh dr pete expanding his understanding and information of things that we are all misinformed about and serotonin is his latest newsletter [36:55] we mentioned last month dr pete the the whole travesty surrounding the ssri's their prescription their over prescription the suicides uh resulting from it and the complicit behavior of pharmaceutical companies as well as political entities and government even uh for allowing this kind of thing to go unchecked when actually the evidence is there to very much damn the product and how the whole misinterpretation of serotonin is a happy happy hormone how this whole quip this cliche is gripped hold of everybody and if you talk to anyone about serotonin or melatonin they will tell you oh it's it improves your sleep or it makes you feel good and i found it's so hard to find any information on the internet about serotonin being anything other than good for you that uh i was going to get into it during this show uh about some of them some of the things that are purported by various entities for serotonin and how how it seems like there's absolutely nothing wrong [37:57] with serotonin and serotonin has got the best the best kind of advertising going for it but let's we'll get into that after this next call because we do have another caller who's called in so let's take this caller a call away from what's your question uh from new york can you hear me yeah could you speak up a little i think you maybe okay um i have a couple of questions first one um you talked about poofa and how damaging it is that particularly accumulates with age and dr pete i was just wondering if it's um mitigated um by taking vitamin e since it's very hard to calculate how much poofa you take take in every day why wouldn't you um over time be taking these small amounts of vitamin e to further protect yourself i'm just curious because you don't take vitamin e right i i use it on my skin because it irritates my digestive system to take it orally but i i think it is good to take a little bit of it okay so you're saying so you're [38:59] saying you do do that but you do it safe more safely by not orally but putting it on the skin is yeah okay so my concept i got the right interpretation okay so you talked about co2 is i think the somebody mentioned about running um a couple things on that so when you run if assuming you're healthy i think you do increase your co2 at least initially and i think you mentioned once you get to the point of fatigue and then you go over a level but do you agree that initially if you don't overdo it and everybody's got their own limit in terms of their health and their capacity for for exercise that you do increase your co2 initially is that you agree with that and until you increase your lactic acid and and that's the first sign that you're damaging yourself okay so i know someone who the minute they finish running to take that risk into consideration they go into you know a co2 like dry bath does that help mitigate the [40:01] risk and the damage that actually is underway if you push beyond the limit yeah a co2 bath is good almost for any condition but especially if you're at the point of making lactic acid it'll help to recover quickly right okay and the other question i i had relating to thyroid you know the test that broda barns i think the way broda barns got into this business is because he had to pick a gland if i read his book correctly and everybody the other glands were taken so he did this and obviously his experience and the number of patients he had over time gave him a massive amount of information but there's in my humble opinion it's just an opinion i've never met the man but i think your knowledge your depth and breadth of physiology and knowledge is just so much broader than his and i'm just thinking that there must be a better way than the basic methods that you know that the knee and other reflexes and the temperature which is kind of [41:02] perfect oh the oxygen consumption is by far the the best oh sorry which one oxygen consumption how do you get that one there might still be apparatus available on the internet old used medical equipment for measuring the bmr they should cost about 200 dollars because it's just an inverted tank and a measured indicator for how far you make the tank sink as you breathe the oxygen out of the air that's holding the tank up in the water and that was used medically around the world for diagnosing hypothyroidism according to that 30 percent of americans were hypothyroid in 1940 and if you use that apparatus now it's more like [42:03] 60 percent i agree and particularly if you do it by age group it's even higher for old people like me but um the other question uh sorry is is um uh if you so the imperfect ways of diagnosing hypothyroidism you know we've gone you've gone through those pretty well but and you mentioned pulse but but you know to me pulse is um correlated to blood pressure so what would you say about a person who you know you're not sure about whether they have it but you know that the the thyroid problem or whether it's like minor but their blood pressure is 120 over 80 i've just given you and it's always 120 over 80 when they sit down they measure it's 120 you stand up you're supposed to stand up to see whether it's really an accurate measurement and it stays around 120 over 80 immediately after standing up that means their their the blood pressure is stable consistently does that tell you anything that since it's related to pulse it might be you know also some information that would give you insight into whether or not someone's chronically hypothyroid [43:07] i haven't in my experience that that would mean very good nervous system energy regulating things but i've known a few people who can't increase their pulse even with the exercise that's me i can't do that i can't do it you're right that's me i'm sorry continue well that would be a good argument for measuring your oxygen consumption because you you can't have any other explanation for for low oxygen consumption than a need for more thyroid yeah the reason i say this because i have a pulse of around 60 i can maybe get up to 70 sometimes when i go to the doctor but i'm always 120 over 80 and i do this stand up to double check it i'm always they say wow your blood pressure is right on the money yeah but my pulse according i didn't i tell this is seems low and they said no that you must be an athlete you know it's typical i cholesterol is another pretty good indicator [44:13] if you're actually actually i have one other quick story so the doctor told me i had it like one um no 330 was my cholesterol right number about 60 right i go so i want to put you on statin so i said would you know that there's a guy from stanford who said that it's salt you know and i said no i'm not going to take him but i'll come back and see you and i mean so then what i did i took some thyroid um but i also increased my salt and i did a lot of the things that you suggest came back dropped like a hundred over 150 points the guy was like wow that's incredible can i see you again and just to confirm it he goes how did you do that and the literally you've been saying this for 30 years and no one wants to listen and i just did the basic things nothing fancy and what you said is exactly correct anyway you're you're you're a legend thank you very much for answering my questions i appreciate your time okay thank you for your call all right so we got 10 minutes left here if you'd like to call in with questions related or unrelated but related to medical issues or questions the number is 707 [45:18] 9233011 dr rayman peat will be with us for the next eight minutes or so so dr peat i've hardly covered anything that i had originally set out to ask you about some of these misconceptions and i'm not saying that's a bad thing because you've spent a long time elaborating on some of the answers for this and we've had plenty of callers i did want to do another misconception and i think next month uh i'd like very much to carry on with the serotonin uh yeah the serotonin mistakes and um just question you a little more about the whole uh tryptophan and its conversion to serotonin and how uh you know our diets are rich in tryptophan whether we like it or not unless we are very fastidious about it and we don't produce our own tryptophan per se to be uh uh you know synthesized de novo um but i'll leave that for the next month because there's another question i wanted to ask you about things that we've heard that it's just another example of how we get brain [46:21] washed into believing something that's not actually true but we do actually have another caller who's called in here so let's take this next caller uh caller you're on the air where are you from and what's your question hi uh this is a caller from utah again uh just had a okay a question related to exercise um so i enjoy certain types of exercise um mostly uh things that you could consider as a game like basketball or soccer or volleyball um and i'd notice that um those are way more fun than something like chess or something that doesn't involve exertion um um i'm i'm wondering if you think that um it would be probably more ideal if you could get that same sort of enjoyment from something that involves less energy expenditure or if maybe the reliance on something like that is a is a symptom of something um maybe [47:27] unideal in the environment that kind of uh makes you turn to something like that yeah i think the experience of having fun or doing something meaningful powerfully overrides the toxic effects of of lactic acid and serotonin and can push things back into shape just because that's how the organism builds itself because doing meaningful things from having fun gotcha so um but on the surface it doesn't really seem like a sport really has that much meaning to it so do you think that it might be a sign that you should be looking for a more ideal environment if you do find yourself turning to things like that um yeah work really should be uh a fun exercise uh so you but if you don't have the experience uh uh in your ordinary working [48:34] activities i think it's good to have the game type of exercise okay cool yeah that makes sense i forget that okay i just wanted to interject there with um something i read a little earlier on that mentioned that the whole learned helplessness concept uh dr peace talked about various animal models uh and the learned helplessness that uh the experience as a result of just giving up and it's just all too much it's actually mediated by too much serotonin how would you say to that dr peace um uh yeah and it can be brought on by anything that overwhelms your your uh self-regulation i think a diagnosis often creates a learned helplessness situation and the person lets their serotonin get out of control yeah i think there's a very good point i've always [49:35] i've long said for a long long time now that a diagnosis is probably the worst thing that a person can get and uh uh i i think why do they call it a die yeah i don't know uh but i often think that as organisms as energetic spiritual beings that we are when we get a diagnosis of something that is quote unquote terminal or just serious i think it's the worst thing in the worst thing in the world to hear because i think uh energetically it just wax you for six and um diagnosis is almost certain to be wrong in some of its explanations and it makes you think of yourself as a machine it needs to fix it yeah yeah all right well we'll we'll cover a little more of that uh maybe next month but like i said next month i really want to i want to play devil's advocate with you uh so far as serotonin is concerned and explore that link go down the rabbit hole with serotonin or [50:38] rather with tryptophan and its conversion into serotonin and how the whole industry uh got generated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors that prevent its breakdown to enable the uh serotonin in the membrane space there to last longer and to make you feel good and just to do all that good stuff when obviously there's a lot of research showing how dangerous it is interacts with the antioxidant industry too okay they come together in very interesting ways i bet they do good all right well i got plenty more questions i want to ask you and we do still have about seven minutes so talking about uh oxidants antioxidants might be a good place to finish up questioning you this month but to start that for next month and then get into the whole uh issue around tryptophan and how uh we can cut this out of our diet as best we can but how obviously it's needed um there's a certain amount of serotonin that is part and parcel of regulating our physiology because there are certain things that uh are implicated in serotonin's uh you know [51:43] secretion that are quote unquote necessary um but the other dogma then uh about oxidants and antioxidants we're always told oh antioxidants are good for you you know they kind of mitigate the damage that uh oxidants cause and oxidation's a bad thing you know if you think about uh a cut apple the surface of a cut apple turning brown uh that's an oxidation reaction though and so it oxidation is not a good thing right it's like like rust uh it's breakdown it's the kind of uh you know it's kind of uh a failure as it were you know so in terms of the antioxidant myth um if you've got anything to say about oxidants and antioxidants that would better describe them and then maybe we might not feel quite so uh yeah confused about the ox antioxidant myth that is uh you know surrounding taking antioxidants per se for you know health benefits one thing to keep in [52:49] mind is that uh cancer cells have a very powerful intrinsic antioxidant system and what you want to do to restore health is is to overcome that antioxidant system and uh the Down's syndrome involves probably the crucial genetic problem it is a huge overdose of the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase a thing that is being sold in health stores even right but when you add this extra gene for the superoxide dismutase to uh animals or or cells in culture it creates accelerated aging as in the Down's syndrome or in Alzheimer's disease [53:52] and uh the uh normal function of superoxide uh it's just an oxygen molecule with an extra electron and it seems to be the active agent in the monoamine oxidase enzyme for destroying serotonin okay and so uh the Down's syndrome platelet is unable to destroy serotonin unable to hold it even and um so the person is saturated with free serotonin because the system isn't able to destroy it at a normal speed interesting now they call they call uh Down's syndrome it had the old name of trisomy 21 right because the the gene well yeah the the chromosome 21 uh there was three [54:54] copies and then they said okay there's an extra 50 increase uh in the products derived from that chromosome of which uh the gene encoding for superoxide dismutase was part of it but i i did read and again it's kind of confused me a little bit because um i also read some other kind of quote unquote conflicting information about that saying that the same chromosome also had the genes for coding beta amyloid precursors which have been implicated in park parkinson's alzheimer's in terms of the amyloid protein deposition there and also also encoded for other oncogenes that cause these kind of negative metabolic processes in Down's patients so the amyloid protein accumulates in many conditions where you're simply a hypothyroid for example or under stress [55:59] but it's possible that there are many other defects but the spectacular one is the the failure of the platelet to oxidize serotonin well it's two minutes to i'm gonna have to cut you short there but thanks for joining us again and next month we'll pick up where we left off i think we've got plenty to plenty to go on here and hopefully uh re-educate uh as we go on so thanks so much for your time okay thank you okay so you've listened to ask your doctor uh k-media gavel 91.1 fm uh it's once a month from seven to eight p.m and we take callers from seven thirty to eight uh most people uh questioning dr p either about what he's talking about at the time or protocols they've been using uh giving him positive feedback about that as from tonight's patient person in new york that was good to hear about his cholesterol uh dr p's been saying that for a long time about high cholesterol patients using thyroid to bring it down and it being a basic defect in high cholesterol uh is that most of its due to hypothyroidism so dr p's information [57:05] is found at www.raypeat.com he's got lots of articles that he's been publishing here for several decades now he's written several books and he's got a wealth of information uh the shows unfortunately you know i've got about two years worth of these shows to post on the internet on our website which is western botanicalmedicine.com i'm a graduated medical herbalist from england producing herbal extracts but dr p's wisdom has also guided my practice in seeing people so anyway uh yeah western botanicalmedicine.com at raypeat.com i'll see you next month at seven o'clock third friday of next month