---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: Managing Hormones and Cancer Treatment With Nutrition
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-211119-managing-hormones-and-cancer-treatment-with-nutrition.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-14"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-14"
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
---

[0:00] 53 degrees outside, 7pm, KMUD, Garberville, KMUE, Eureka, KLAI, Laytonville, where the views and opinions expressed throughout the broadcast day are those of the speaker and not necessarily the station staff, underwriters, or volunteers. Sometimes it's not even the speaker's point of view, they're possibly trolling you, but more likely they're just trying to express somebody else's point of view so that you can more completely understand the issues at hand. So don't get mad, just give your information out too. [4:29] And I believe I have the herb doctor here. Hey, good evening. Good evening. And we have Dr. Pete. I'm sorry, that took so long? Take it away. No problem. No problem. Welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor, the, see here, November 19th edition, 2021. My name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. Welcome to our show, Ask Your Herb Doctor. For those of you who just joined us or have never heard the show before, it runs every [5:32] third Friday of the month from 7 to 8 p.m. We have a call-in, a live call-in from 7.30 until the close of the show at 8 o'clock. People have invited the call-in with any questions related to the topic that we're discussing. As has become very customary now, Dr. Pete is our guest and joining us to share his knowledge. Last month in October, we opened up a discussion which we couldn't finish in a month, and it was concerning metabolic defects in cancer and also the approach to cancer, the strategies or alternative approaches to cancer. Dr. Pete has for 35, 40 years been researching and working in alternative medicine approaches to physiology and has a website with a wealth of information that will be giving help towards [6:36] the end of the show. Let me just see if Dr. Pete is with us and go from there. Dr. Pete, are you with us? Yes. I can just barely hear you. Okay, I wonder if you have a volume. Do you have a volume setting on your phone? It's a tinny quality. It isn't the volume. It's a blurry tinny quality. Yeah, you guys sound like you're on a speakerphone or something, maybe. You're not the best connection. I think it's okay. If callers don't think so, they'll pipe up, though. Let me just ask both of you. This is any clearer now. Did either of you hear that better? I heard a click and I think it got better, but I was also switching from one thing to another here, but I think that is a little better. Yeah, Dr. Pete, do you hear that any better? I can hear you, but not the engineer. Oh, yeah. I think that aspect, that's an aspect of our board, I think. But he doesn't need to hear me. You guys are the important ones. [7:37] Yeah, okay. At this time, I'm not too sure Sarah can hear us. Does she hear anything? Well, I think we'd probably just better carry on this way, then, and just sometime during Dr. Pete's explanation of some of the questioning we'll be going through to tonight. We perhaps can get Sarah on, and she can be part of that, otherwise. Okay, so Dr. Pete, thanks so much for giving your time again this month. Would you just let people know more about you from an academic research perspective, and then we can carry on the show. Okay, in the sixties, I was studying various subjects in humanities, and I decided to go into biology to study the brain, mainly. But when I got to graduate school in 1968, my interest went to aging [8:39] and its influence on the metabolism of largely the reproductive process, how reproduction influences the general process of aging. And since then, I've been following up the same general topics, aging, stress, sickness, and especially health hormones, reproductive hormones, can accelerate or retard the process of aging. Okay, so in terms of hormonal physiology for aging, that's been a specialism, and I know you've worked in many other related branches of that surrounding natural health care. Last month, we opened up a discussion on the alternative approaches to cancer with an emphasis on the metabolic defects, which you have fairly set principles [9:43] that you have uncovered over time, some of which obviously don't line up with regular medicine. I know you have a very alternative perspective towards treating people, and I think I'm right in saying that the first do-no-harm rationale would be something you hold quite closely. Modern cancer therapy and chemotherapy and radiotherapy, I don't think these are modalities at which you are at all in favour of, but that's a very personal choice that each patient who's going through cancer therapy has to come up against, but obviously going through herbal medicine and alternative medicines, most people perhaps looking for alternatives are not looking at conventional treatment anyway. Last month, we covered cellular mitochondria activity and how that produces energy. [10:44] We discussed the myth of sugar being cancer-promoting, which is fairly right in the mainstream. It seems to be repeated almost daily that sugar is something to be avoided for almost everything, and you've dispelled that myth for sure. Then the neuroendocrine dysregulation. We've mentioned things like estrogen driving not only breast but other cancers, and then what they call the hyperthelacic pituitary axis, where stress produces cortisol and through chronic stress the immune system can suffer and how this is all part and parcel of a weakened organism that does in some ways predispose to the lack of surveillance. The last thing I think we got to was looking at radot balancing [11:47] and mentioning that the flavonoids are a fairly diverse group of plant products in many, many different areas can be used to quench free radical damage, which is part and parcel also of cancer in its own right. I had some abstracts that got my interest. I know you're a big proponent of saturated fats, and you do not at all adhere to polyunsaturates as being in any way healthy or beneficial for the organism and actually very much destruction and inflammation is caused by them. The abstracts I was looking at were things like lipid proxidation, which we have talked about on many different shows at many different times, and this proxidation and byproducts of lipid metabolism or lipid oxidation is what happens. [12:54] These have been things that have been shown to promote cancer. The whole rationale of people using these omega-3s and 6s and fish oils as being quote-unquote healthy is absolutely not what you want to be using if you've got cancer diagnosis or even if you don't have a cancer diagnosis. How about that? A couple of the abstracts you're referring to, I think, mentioned that on a high fish oil diet, the metastasis was about a thousand times worse than on a low-fat diet or even a fat-deficient diet. Just a huge difference from supplementing fish oil versus not having fat. We can make all of the unsaturated and saturated fats that we need from carbohydrates, [13:58] so we don't really need any fats in the diet except for the pleasant taste and helping to absorb other nutrients. These abstracts in particular showed the tremendous pro-metastatic effect of the fish oil fat. I saw the other references, particularly for liver metastasis and cancer growth in the liver. Obviously, the liver is one of the major organs blood flows through, so vascular-borne cancers that travel to different sites through the vasculature can certainly become picked up in the liver and the liver itself because it's kind of sinusoidal organ, like a sponge, if you like, a matrix of very many capillaries and openings and ducts [15:02] and places where cancers can settle and grow are quite often seen in cancer as a secondary spread to the liver. The other articles here that I saw said that these omega-3s in particular, I think the sixes were probably also implicated, but the omega-3s promoted along cancer metastasis to the liver. Again, there was a direct causal relationship between these omega-3s and liver metastasis. Dr. P, can you hear me okay? Yes. This lipid peroxidation or rancid fat, when we eat fat, it can go rancid if it's not saturated. That's known as lipid peroxidation. That applies to not only the fish oils, but also all the vegetable seed oils, [16:04] like the canola and the soy and all the vegetable oils. The more highly unsaturated they are, the quicker they break down. Some of the oxidative breakdown is almost immediately, as soon as it gets absorbed from your intestine and shows up in your bloodstream, you can find the highly oxidized breakdown fragments of the polyunsaturated fats like fish oil. Did I hear you correctly stating that metastasis is a thousand times worse in a fatty diet versus a non-fat diet? A couple of these studies found that the number and quantity of identifiable metastatic cancer was, in these cases, a thousand times higher. [17:05] This would again lead to people that have talked about ketogenic diets. This is absolutely the last thing you want to be doing, right? Yeah, and in the process of getting the ketogenic effect, basically it's starvation and stress that turns on the so-called ketone production. But actually the so-called ketone bodies, one of the major ketone bodies, is actually not a ketone but an alcohol-hydroxyl group as a potential ketone. But in the hydroxyl stage, which is formed during the ketogenic diet, this becomes a reductant having an effect similar to lactic acid, [18:07] which is a trigger to shift oxidation towards the fermentation or the lactic acid metabolism, typical of cancer. And once anything interferes with your ability to oxidize glucose fully, that liberates any stored fatty acids you have in your tissues. And everyone has an abundance of fat mixed right into their functioning tissues. And in the ketogenic state, you are releasing free fatty acids into the bloodstream. And all of the liberated free fatty acids that have been studied promote metastasis. [19:11] It isn't just the extremely toxic fish oil type, but just the fact of being a fatty acid rather than a sugar. Many years ago someone named Randall noticed that if you increase the fat in your diet and it turns into free fatty acids, the free fatty acids block the particular enzyme of pyruvate dehydrogenase, which lets us oxidize glucose all the way to carbon dioxide. And the free fatty acids directly activate the enzyme that knocks out our ability to oxidize glucose. And so once you get ketogenic from some degree of starvation, then you're poisoning your ability to fully oxidize glucose. [20:18] That leaves it producing lactic acid. And when the pyruvate dehydrogenase is poisoned by various things, but especially free fatty acids, then you shift over to the cancer metabolism producing lactic acid, which shifts the metabolism of other cells in the same direction. So would that apply to saturated fat but at a lesser extent? Yeah. In some cases certain saturated fats don't do that at all, but on average whenever it's been studied the Randall effect works as soon as our glucose oxidation is interfered with by rising free fatty acids. [21:20] Right. So this isn't really alternative medicine because this is scientifically backed and researched information that Dr. Pete is sharing with us tonight that might not be applied in orthodox medical treatment of cancer, but this is in no way on the fringe of science. This is scientific information. Yeah, it actually represents more than 60 years of investigating what is actually happening in the metabolism of stress and cancer. And the whole thing that has developed in the last 50 years of saying that cancer eats sugar, cancer lives on sugar. Therefore if you stop eating sugar you'll starve with cancer. That's absolutely 100%!w(MISSING)rong. [22:22] What sugar starvation does is cause the Randall cycle to take effect, blocking your ability to oxidize sugar fully so you oxidize your fermented producing lactic acid which promotes more of the cancer metabolism and creates inflammation and brings up the cortisol stress hormones that break down proteins to make more of the glucose or amino acids which will feed the cancer. The fatty acids themselves are good food for the cancer, but at a certain point of wasting away from cancer, [23:24] fatty acids aren't very abundant in the body and so the lactic acid metabolism is maintained by turning body proteins into glucose and amino acids to support the lactic acid metabolism of cancer. So in general, when you consult with people that might have cancer, would you recommend them to eat then a nonfat or very low fat diet and a very high sucrose and fructose diet? Yeah, carbohydrates in general, especially sucrose. Which is sugar folks and honey and sugar are chemically identical? Yeah, I think it was last month I mentioned the grape diet, it was famous in the 40s and 50s. [24:26] It was a very high glucose and sucrose diet combined with the very high intake of the anti-inflammatory flavonoids. But those are two of the very important anti-cancer agents, the anti-inflammatory component of the diet that you get in fruits and vegetables and then the abundance of the minerals and other nutrients or fruit, but an abundance of sucrose so that you don't resort to any tendency to liberate fatty acids. Okay, you're listening to ask your doctor KMUD 91.1 FM from 7.30 to the end of the show. Callers are welcome to call in, the question is related to this month's continuing topic of cancer and cancer alternatives. [25:30] Again, the number if you're outside or even in the area is 707-923-3911 guest speaker Dr. Raymond P. Dr. P, I wanted to question you a little bit about something that from a herbal medicine perspective is very important for basically as an anti-cancer strategy, as well as recognizing the actual function and value of the lymphatics. I know in breast cancer, lymph nodes obviously become congested, they pick up cancer cells, they are treatment, they are primarily white cell surveillance sites with other cells that are killer cells, etc. They're doing some kind of routine surveillance of all of the fluids that are constantly passing through them. But I wanted to get to the point of a few years ago, now I haven't been discovered long, [26:34] I think I read it in a science magazine maybe two or three years ago, a new organ that science had finally uncovered and it was because of a laser type treatment of endoscopy that previously when they had fixed tissue to look at microscopy, microscopically, they saw that these collagen sheets and bundles looked fairly flattened and fairly solid in these tissues, but yet when they used these lasers, they saw that these were structural cavities that were filled with fluid and they called this material, this ground substance, the interstitium and they now say that this interstitium is a fifth organ and primarily I think one of the largest organ in the body, but it's responsible obviously for the metastases of cancer cells [27:38] and in herbal medicine like I said, the principle that I think of is Pocru, it's been traditionally used for breast cancer as well as other cancers, certainly has lymphatic and immunostimulant anti-inflammatory activity and like I said, it's definitely been used if certainly in Europe ongoing and it's been in the herbal pharmacopoeia for many years in the treatment of cancers and specifically for lymphatic cancers and breast cancers, but what do you understand about the interstitium and this so-called ground substance through which I think some of these compounds, I think one, namely the main compound from phytolaca is having its activity with, but obviously other agents get into the lymphatics, there's obviously a pathway for many different substances [28:39] but some of the structures have been identified within this previously thought to be amorphous extravascular system a Korean named Bongun Kim I think it was in the 1960s called it the third circulatory system and what are now known as the exosomes, a large number of these small vesicles secreted by cells are transported outside the blood vessels some of them inside the ordinary blood stream but many of them flow through apparent channels in the extracellular material that seem to be almost specific for carrying the lipid, the micro vesicles or exosomes from a cell under stress to a cell [29:52] which is for example in the bone marrow that can produce repair factors and send it back through the various circulatory systems or the extra lymphatic one identified by the Korean or via the blood stream itself to either correct a tumor or in some cases make it worse depending on the state of the organism and we have a couple of callers okay we're good let's hold that there and I just got into the subject of connective tissue health which I was going to take the direction of this next subject but let's take this first caller caller you're on the airway from what's your question it was a local person who was very bad connection but I was able to they very simple they wanted to know what you thought of flax oil and what you thought of avocados [30:53] Josh P avocados are good enough, very pleasant, nutritious food but you don't want to eat very large quantities as the regular quantity just because there is some unsaturated fat in it and the flax oil is also very highly polyunsaturated so the flax meal has a laxative effect a bulk laxative action so the flax meal can be a protective anti-cancer but you don't want to build up a reserve of the polyunsaturated fats found in flax oil and here's your next caller [31:54] Hello Dr. B and his friend I just wanted to say I have two miraculous stories I'll start with my own quickly I developed a chest cancer and I knew it was cancer because it's a cancer that type it really feels like a little needle inside of your chest and I knew exactly what to do I don't can't tell you why I knew what to do but I had had ordered from a essential oil company a product called frankincense and I opened up the clear glass bottle and I liberally put it on my chest and in four hours later the pain stopped and I know I had killed the cancer I just absolutely bathed it in the frankincense it didn't return ever it's been ten years now that was my story and no one knew about it except me and I was quite proud of that [33:05] the other was my sister went down to San Francisco to UCSF and she was the doctor said you have a cancer and she was very upset about that of course and we would all be as I was as well and so I said look I had used frankincense prior to this time to kill cancer start that program so I went down and I got her some three or four ounces of frankincense now this was older frankincense it was about maybe six months to a year old I call it out of date and I gave that to her and she started doing that and now we're just basic people you know she has a college degree I have two years of college and so I'm talking hopefully on just a level I'm not a doctor myself I don't claim to be a physician I'm just telling you what I have done to be successful [34:12] and so I started her on that program of applying it into the area and I've also used it internally before and as long as you don't use too much and we're all different I was also taking it internally for a while mixing it with like a some sort of water or juice and that seems to have cleansed out my system as well she started on the program of using the frankincense topically and she said I had a fist on the front of my body and started using it and she said about three months later that little fist fell out onto her finger and she was quite astonished about that but the other thing that she didn't tell me about that was she was using was something called zeolite and CEO LITE I believe and she said that it was taking the heavy metals out of the body and excreting them out she has been a person that's eaten organically her whole life she is intolerant cannot take calcium through dairy products [35:22] and she has her own way she's a vegetarian she has her own gardens and she's lived this way her whole life what do you think of those two things? right okay well I can mention frankincense and I remember the name bozwheelia sacra and I was going to mention it one of the many herbs that have been used for cancer specifically I think for skin cancers so bozwheelia is one of the herbs that we are going to mention and then zeolite it sounds like a chelating agent Dr. Pete do you know much about zeolite and its use? I didn't hear all of that but frankincense and myrrh contain a variety of chyturpeans that are stricken similarly to the steroids and they haven't actually been studied enough to define exactly how their anti-cancer effect works [36:27] okay you're listening to ask your doctor camey de garble 91.1 FM from now until the end of the show 8 o'clock you invited the call in the questions related to cancer the number is 707-923-3911 and we're still in our little fundraising thing could you maybe put out a plea to your listeners because I know there's people who tune in from literally all over the world for this show it's kind of a unique radio station that we have this platform for Dr. Pete here and for you guys and it's pledge drive time Okay yeah well for those people that are listening to the show I just want you to recognize that we still have a free speech radio program I think that's the most important thing that people need to remember I've said this before that free speech is very important it's one of our main principal constitutional rights to hear both sides of the discussion I think when things become one sided that's when we become seriously in trouble [37:33] and so this radio station has many different people speaking on many different platforms and what I really appreciate is that they give time for both sides they give time to all sides they're not exclusive so as one of those few places I think that is still left to have a pretty balanced viewpoint from people from different camps and so it's got to be something that you guys value here especially people living quickly I think up in the hills etc some of the people they listen to this show a lot it's one of their main sources of information they get news articles from around the world it's not just local politics but national and international and so if you want to keep the radio station going folks I strongly encourage you to send money in and donations however much you can afford it does need to be funded it does get some funding externally but it's definitely has a shortfall in its budget annually [38:34] but every year people donate and they step up to the plate and thank goodness KMUD is still on the airwaves I appreciate it very much to give us a platform here to give people alternatives and for those people who are listening now please if you haven't already joined as a member please consider calling in giving a donation either one time or a revolving donation it all goes to help keep this local radio station going and out of the hands of sole proprietors with single genders so please go ahead and make that call yeah I'm not even so sure that we're trying to have every side of every idea put out across the air it's more that as a community we have so many different community members who do have a little time on air that all together in the aggregate we get an awful lot of opinions and if you don't hear an opinion on here that you want to hear on here then that's when you call in [39:35] and thank God it's Friday or some other show when it's appropriate and express your opinion or all sides now okay so once again the number 707-923-3911 so Dr. Peep just getting back to the herbal medicine perspective of improving the connective tissue and strengthening the connective tissue and the infestation being a pathway, a highway through which fluids move and can either be picked up in the lymphatic if they are things like bacteria or yeast or fungal spores etc. and trapped and dealt with and neutralized the cancer is also able to use this same highway to be taken to distant sites but there is definitely is a rationale for improving the connective tissue itself as cancer tissue, cancer cells and cancers locally break down adjacent tissues and invade them [40:41] in their quest for access to the vascular tissue or the lymphatics what do you think about agents that we're familiar with things like horsetail, a rich source of silica or whether it's phytolacca and the main components of phytolacca that have this lymphatic immune stimulating activity do you think there's a value in, what do you see as a value in improving and turning the tissues I know you mentioned a lot about calcium and calcium obviously is part and parcel of improving the extracellular matrix and it's only a stasis between being stored in the bone and being available in the bloodstream it's something you see people get plenty of calcium for and the role of calcium is very closely related to energy metabolism and inflammation when you're deficient in energy you activate many of the pro-inflammatory peptides and small lipid molecules [41:56] that in an ideal situation that momentary increase of inflammation can reactivate design repair processes especially for the connective tissue but getting the energy and essential nutrients provided is going to have an anti-inflammatory effect which allows the energy production to take effect and maintain structural integrity and the effect of adequate calcium in your diet is to oppose the excitatory effects of too much phosphate in your diet so the calcium is having an anti-inflammatory pro-energy restoration effect [42:57] and that has the effect of maintaining structural integrity of the interstitium, the whole structural framework holds cells together we've got a caller not only anti-cancer but you're mentioning the benefits it has on maintaining healthy connective tissue as well keeping inflammation down and energy up okay so did Michael did you say that there was another caller? yes there is a caller yeah go ahead let's take this next caller call away from what's your question hi I'm from Garberville and I had a low-grade bladder cancer and it came back again and they just take it out [43:58] but I was wondering if you had any recommendations and I think I'll take my answer on the air okay Dr. P low-grade bladder cancer what would you suggest as being good approaches about obviously everything that we had previously talked about but go ahead and speak to that there have been several people developed effective treatments by infusing a mixture of nutrients, vitamin A related things proteolytic enzymes and stabilizing anti-inflammatory things such as I think lidocaine was one of them into the bladder and then arranging the person's posture so that the mixture is in contact with the actual tumor itself so you can get a very high concentration on the tumor [45:02] and several of those procedures have been very effective at removing persistent bladder tumors okay so let me just repeat that to make sure that we heard you correctly so you said there's been research done to show that an infusion of proteolytic enzymes, vitamin A compounds and lidocaine infused with the person laying down in such a way that the you know whether it was on the back of the bladder wall or the front of the bladder wall laying on their back or their front is that what you mean yeah I'm not sure if that was a complete list of the ingredients but two or three groups were using very similar groups with a very high cure rate and what are you what is infusion in this context for treating tumors on the wall of the bladder [46:03] but are you putting that up through the urethra or are you drinking that filling the bladder with a mixture half filling it alright and you also said anti-inflammatory things so maybe like aspirin maybe would they have infused aspirin into the bladder I didn't hear that would they have used something like aspirin as well as an anti-inflammatory or I always recommend aspirin for any cancer it reduces inflammation helps to restore the energy level and has at least a dozen effects that help to control or eliminate cancer okay good okay you're listening to ask your doctor K. M. E. D. Garbovul 91.1 FM from now until the close of the show 8 o'clock you're invited to call in the questions the number is 707 [47:05] 923 3911 Dr. Raymond Peake with us in the studio and I just want to say I would like to put the warning out there that if people are choosing to use aspirin for treating their own cancers and they're doing a home treatment like that you should really call us and we'll give you the instructions on how to take aspirin safely in conjunction with vitamin K2 it's very important if you're taking more than a baby aspirin a day that you take vitamin K2 to prevent blood bleeding and also you don't really have till 8 o'clock you should call right away because we got to give them time to finish up and if you do call in right away you got to keep it brief no what I mean sorry let's if anyone wants to use aspirin any more than a baby aspirin a day then email us or call us at our number which is western botanical medicine 707 986 9506 [48:08] and our email is either Andrew or Sarah at westernbotanicalmedicine.com and Sarah is with an H S-A-R-A-H at westernbotanicalmedicine.com Okay so Dr. Peake how about I mean again aspirin I think just as we mentioned it talking about the coagulopathy that happens with cancer and even if it's not stimulated by estrogen which promotes blood thickening and clotting and is pro cancer in its own right the approach to treatment as anti coagulopathy treatment in terms of making the platelets less sticky making blood flow more easily do you think this would be would have a good rational basis in science for using things like aspirin and garlic and things like Inco [49:12] and other things that got traditionally used for improving blood flow and preventing clotting system and the platelets are very central to the ability of the metastatic cells to get across the blood vessel into the area it's going to colonize as metastatic cancer and various things that decrease the stickiness and the tendency to coagulate of the platelets several of these substances have been studied and very strongly discourage metastatic spread and so increase the survival rate lidocaine, aspirin and progesterone are just three of the factors that have been over and over [50:16] demonstrated to interfere with the metastatic stickiness and the ability to travel on the cancer cells makes them stay home and not hurt anything stay home cancer my next question is kind of anti angiogenic activity to manage cancer a little bit like diabetes because diabetes has been implicated in the breakdown of vascular walls there were studies in the 40s and 50s showing that the longer people left their cancer untreated the longer they lived and several studies have looked at the statistics and the population in general showing that the more you treat in some cancers the survival rate stays the same [51:20] no matter how much you do to the patient but in some cases the more you treat the higher the death rate is that that was first seen distinctly in the case of prostate cancer in the early 90s by the end of the century this had impressed enough prostate specialists that they came up with the idea of watchful waiting figuring that if you don't use any of the harmful treatments such as high dose estrogen to treat prostate cancer and just watch what's happening don't do multiple biopsies and so on but the normal aging process happens faster than the development of a normal old men's prostate cancer and that's a well established concept now that [52:24] watchful waiting has actually improved the mortality rate from cancer failing to treat it I think you quote Dr. Pete 99.9%!o(MISSING)f people over the age of 50 have some form of abdominal cancer 99.9%!o(MISSING)f people will not die of cancer in an autopsy you can find cancer essentially in 100%!o(MISSING)f the people over 50 if you look for it it's part of a natural healing process most people coexist with many of these little cancers that aren't really hurting anything I think on a very quick side note just for people to help people if they want to try this themselves [53:28] advocate self treatment generally on a very small side note I had a keratosis and what I thought was a keratosis on the side of my nose and I've spoken to you about this Dr. Pete three or four years ago I had it for two years it obviously wasn't healthy cells it was unhealthy cells in your latest photograph your nose looks flat I just wanted to tell people that I had it unfortunately or unfortunately I didn't have a biopsy done and it identified it as basal cell carcinoma and of course they wanted to do this and everything with it which I refused I went ahead and did what you suggested I do I don't have it anymore I mean folks it is possible your nose looks perfect before we end I want to mention a book that I think might be the most important published in the last two or three years just came out [54:32] it's Robert Kennedy Jr's the real Anthony Fauci gives a background for the not only the COVID process but the background going back decades he's been there for 40 years or something he's pretty entrenched Dr. Fauci is pretty entrenched but this book I think is going to change that they said that he would possibly purge it himself but anyway thanks so much for your time Dr. Pete it's five to the hour I know the engineer wants to wrap it up for eight o'clock and we need to give people your information so thanks so much for joining us okay thank you thank you Dr. Pete goodnight he's been doing this over 40 years he's written several books he's published hundreds of articles he's a very altruistic character as most people who know him [55:36] can attest his website is reypeeps.com and so his journal articles there are well referenced he's a very scientific person he doesn't believe in hocus pocus and crystal dangling and whatever else I'm sorry to offend some people who maybe use crystals I'm not saying they didn't work or do anything but it's generally a do less than do something proactive situation so we can be contacted Monday through Friday www.botanicalmedicine.com the 707-986-9506 and so until the December version we will look forward to seeing you here in promune answering questions give us feedback and thanks so much for your time thank you happy Thanksgiving and thanks for tuning in [56:40] my name's Sarah Murray my name's Andrew Murray goodnight music music music music music music music music music music music music music [59:44] Oh
