---
source:
  series: Ask Your Herb Doctor
  title: MSG, Cancer, Estrogen and Autoimmunity
  url: https://www.toxinless.com/kmud-220121.mp3
  kind: audio
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-12"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-12"
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
---

[0:00] Mind everybody out there listening far and wide that if you do not support your source of information then you are the product and your brain space is being sold to whoever does support the source of your news and information. So please support whatever local independent news sources that you consume and maybe even some of those outside of where you consume just because you know you've got to keep a broader point of viewpoints alive out there because sooner or later you'll be caught in a little cul-de-sac and you'll have nowhere to go and you'll rue the day you didn't support Redwood Community Radio. So without further ado, let's get into Ask Your Herb Doctor. [1:07] Thank you. Well, thank you, good evening and welcome to January the 21st, 2022's edition of Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Johansson Murray. Welcome to our show. Well, you're listening to KMUD Garbable 91.1 FM here from the Redwood Coast of California broadcasting nationwide and internationally to a wide range of open-minded, perceptive [2:10] individuals who want to know what's really going on. Well, if you want to know what's really going on, keep tuned to the show. Don't forget to listen to the audio archives that are recorded, but unfortunately they are only kept for a month or two at the most, but our website has at least 10 years of archives but I've got at least another two years to put up. So excuse me for that. It's been a bit busy. Yeah. I'd like to comment on the archive situation because I thought that they used to be held for a lot longer and one of my past hosts called me up saying, hey, our organization sent you people. So I was able to tell Simon about that and he was able to give them a special link. They're up there. Oh, really? Good. They're up there. They're up there three months as it is right now. Interesting. It used to be there in the state at that point. But there is a way that you can find a quick link to yours and you could put that on your website too. And also we as programmers should talk to Kima to try to get it back to me at last. We record all of them, so they are intended to be put on the website, but it's the same [3:11] thing. I just get so busy that it just kind of slips. So anyway, you're listening to Ask Your Herb Dr. Kami DeGarble, 91.1 FM from 7.30 until the end of the show at eight o'clock. You're invited to call in the questions related or unrelated to this month's subject of MSG and cancer and a continuation of estrogen and its progressively destructive effects and induction of autoimmunity and cancer. We have a bit of a wrap up from last month to finish and then get started with the MSG and the glutamate, et cetera, and the links to cancer and excitotoxicity. There's also a link to COVID and MSG through its negative effects on the immune system. So let me see here. The number is 707-923-3911. So from 7.30 until the end of the show, please go ahead and call up with any questions you have related to this month's subject. Or if you have other questions you want to post to Dr. Pete, we'd love to hear them too. [4:15] Okay, so Dr. Pete, are you with us? Yes. Okay, thanks so much for joining us again. As usual, I think let's just make sure that you are fully introduced to the audience, perhaps those people, some of which may never have heard you, and just let me know a little bit about you and what your expertise is. Oh, now you want to hear her? Yes, please. Okay. I have been a student of the humanities and teaching painting and English literature and various humanities subjects, and I got interested in the language and how the brain can do such a thing as use language, and I decided that the only way to make progress was to go to a graduate school in biology and study the brain. And so in 1968, I went back to the University of Oregon, and I quickly found that the nerve [5:23] biology section of the department was very dogmatic and cared more about their theories than the actual experimental evidence, and in fact, didn't like to look too much at experimental results if they didn't absolutely fall in line with the theory. And I found, looking around for several weeks, I checked into many different labs at the university and found that the aging research in reproductive physiology and how it's affected by aging, they were the most concerned with finding out what's really happening. I'm sorry, I decided to do my dissertation on that, which I finished in 1972, age-related [6:34] oxidative changes in the hamster uterus, and surprisingly, that had a huge amount of information relative to brain function and everything else to thoroughly understand what's going on in aging changes and how the organism redesigns cells so that they can start a new life from a single fertilized ovum. That involves the same principles that you need to look at to see what the brain is doing in relation to behavior and understanding language and so on. One thing led into another, and I've been working on those subjects ever since. [7:40] Yeah, excellent. Well, I really, from a social perspective, I really appreciate your interweaving your artistic nature with a fluid understanding, perhaps, which is not current, I think mainstream understanding tends to be fairly dogmatic. You have a very fluid, plastic way of looking at things, and I know it's brought a very wide spotlight on a lot of subjects that we've covered, and I really appreciate you sharing your wisdom with us. And I know, and as I said many, many times, the archives that we've recorded with, probably for the last 14 years, nearly now, there are going to be a living testimony to what's already been confirmed, I think somewhat reluctantly by some industries, because they'd like to keep control of their dominance, but a lot of these things that you've been saying have been confirmed, and I think it's early, but surely people are getting a much better understanding of the way things really are, unlike what they've been told. [8:43] So I think without further ado, I just wanted to say for those that are listening that there was several, several questions that I wanted to ask Dr. Pete last month about estrogen, its relationship to autoimmunity and cancer, but very quickly I just wanted to cover a couple of things from a noble perspective surrounding estrogen and aromatase that I just wanted to share with people. So last month I mentioned a cucurbitaceous vine bearing a plant called monmodica shirantia, which is bidamellum, has been used to block estrogen, essentially has estrogen modulating properties, and this is an anti-diabetic plant, essentially kind of works with regulating blood glucose. I wanted to also mention artemisinin, a component really of wormwood, but also artemisianua, that actually contains not just anti-parasitic, antimicrobial and antiviral effects, but it's also been shown to reduce the estrogen receptor function in breast cancer cell lines. [9:47] So that's worth people taking a look at PubMed or any other peer-reviewed work done by postdocs or PhDs who are looking at this as an interesting part of their thesis. So artemisinin does have anti-estrogenic activity. I wanted to say quickly that also tamoxifen may be useful in the treatment of immune mediated disorders, particularly those arising from aberrant helper T1 cell activity, including allograft rejection. It's also been used with some success in Crohn's. But I wanted just to bring that out that the induced shift away from cellular immunity represents a significant step in fostering a cancerogenic environment, and this may limit the anti-cancer effects of tamoxifen and thus explain why tamoxifen is inferior compared to other anti-estrogens, many of which Dr. Pete's bought out, many of which we're probably going to be covering again quickly, for preventing disease recurrence in early breast tumors, [10:52] early stage breast tumors. So I think let's get into, before we retrace too much, that was a small part of what I wanted to just make sure they got out there first of all, but I think let's just kick off tonight with, at the topic of MSG, and we've had the last couple of shows on estrogen, but last month specifically from an excitotoxic perspective, that is where the cell is getting so excited that essentially it goes into an early death cycle. But more necessarily include to make the Food and Drug Administration has considered it safe to add to food, and it's one of the most abundantly found amino acids in nature and it's present in a heterogenous group of foods as a flavor enhancer and issued as a food additive known as E621 in the form of hydrolyzed protein or as a purified monosodium salt. [11:53] And very early on, and this is how I want to ask you Dr. Pete to kind of compare these two, early on they were demonstrating or they seemingly were demonstrating the benefits of monosodium glutamate as responsible for increasing temperature, decreasing body mass, and decreasing production of fat tissue so that it would be readily taken up, I mean not just because of the umami flavor and the taste benefits, the taste enhancing benefits that were conferred to foods that had monosodium glutamate added to them. And I was surprised to find that there was a wide variety of foods, including things like walnuts, garlic, onion, potatoes, these would be pre-packaged perhaps dried products, not just not the fresh product, although some of these products do contain their own natural glutamate of course, and then chicken, beef, eggs, human milk and cow milk, and actually [12:54] in fairly large amounts, so the negative effect of this glutamine essentially was that it suppressed the oxidation of glucose, so I'm wondering, there are claims of obesity whereas before they were talking about how it was going to increase your metabolism and burn fat and speed you up and everything else, but Dr. Pete you've been looking at monosodium glutamate and its excitotoxic effects and a little later on we'll get into some of the potential cancer risks associated and why the FDA is still not banning it? Yeah, I think the weight loss thing was just a sales ploy to sell the flavoring substance in the 1970s mostly, JW Olney found that when rats were fed just a little more than the amount that a person could normally eat in various artificial foods or add flavoring, [13:59] that the brain was damaged in a certain way that led to lifelong obesity, a destruction of enough of the brain that appetite remained out of control and the metabolic rate wasn't sufficient to keep weight weight steady and over a period of several years he did many experiments including showing that the same sort of molecule aspartic acid or aspartame or variations but as long as it was acting through the glutamate receptor or the aspartate receptor it had this range of excitatory effects that one of the positive things was that it [15:04] made you seem more alert but that alertness came at the expense of not having enough energy produced to meet the high energy consumption caused by the excitatory action of the aspartator or glutamate. Isn't the aspartate, aspartam, isn't that also like that fake sugar, a slender or something like that? Nutrisweet I thought it was, it's aspartic acid with methanol and then it degrades into methanol and leaves methanol in your neurons, I think aspartame is the super sweet material sweeter than saccharin but the amount that is toxic is very small and they've demonstrated [16:06] that it can cause brain cancer and only among others in the late 70s was showing that the sudden appearance of a rising incidence of gliomas, a middle ignorant, a fetal cell tumors brain cancer he demonstrated that you could cause those by overfeeding the glutamase or MSG to animals and that the rise in the population incidence and mortality from the tumors followed by a few years the introduction of foods that were loaded with everything from aspartame to MSG and looking at the animal research where you have no, no way growing incidence [17:16] of brain cancer is partly caused by the artificial sweeteners and flavoring materials. Just goes to show we can't trust the ethics of the FDA if they're allowing that to take the product on the market. And cell phones have corresponded, for example, if a person habitually holds their cell phone to the right ear, the incidence of brain tumors on the right side of a particular kind has increased sharply since the use of cell phones and it happens that they are both causes of excitotoxicity. The electromagnetic field excites the cells and you need to provide energy to keep up with that or the cell dies. And ongoing experiments show that when cells are [18:22] endangered by such things as MSG or aspartame, if you intervene by giving them a super amount of sugar, glucose or other sugar will save the neurons simply by feeding whatever is needed to keep up with the high level of excitation. And that is an image, the excitotoxic conflict between unavoidable stimulation of excitation combined with something interfering with the oxidation of glucose that isn't applicable only to aging and gliomas, a terminal type [19:24] of brain cancer usually. It applies to epilepsy, for example, if the cells aren't able to keep up their energy production and use with the excitation, the seizure gets out of control and damages the tissue. And it turns out that other, it isn't just nerve cells, they're just the most obvious among the earliest to respond to extreme disparity between the energy to supply and the energy needed to meet the stimulation. But any cell that can be sad-fatedly stimulated can be rescued if you keep the sugar supply up. But if it isn't [20:28] kept up then that cell, for example, it can become cancerous. The excited cells can form brain tumors or they can just die leading to dementia or various types of brain function loss depending on which cells they are. This is like a kind of wasteful entropy then that happens as a lack of input of the energy needed to keep the cell going. Yeah, and it's made worse by overlapping influences. It isn't just cell phone radiation and a spark came into MSG, but many different things all have that same function. So eating Chinese food [21:28] has MSG in it, drinking diet soda, less talking on your cell phone, holding it up to your head. And if you look at what any stress does, no matter what you're doing to the cell, vibration or laser over simulation or a telephone over simulation or even simply glucose deprivation or oxygen deprivation, they all turn out to be excitatory. Yeah, I think to coin that term wasteful was probably a good way for people who are listening to the show to understand the term excitatory. It's kind of very wasteful, blowing off of your energy with just inefficient processes. Yeah, and it happens that the feeding of energy in the form of sugar has a sedative action [22:34] that leads to turning down the degree of excitation, the harmful influence that the damage to the cell, which might be oxygen or glucose deprivation, or a temperature too cold or too hot, anything harmful turns out to activate a whole range of short term solutions that if the cell perceives that it is not getting enough energy to meet the needs, one alternative is to try to go into hibernation to turn off its own needs for energy. And to do that, it has the equipment [23:34] for producing serotonin, which will help to retain, prevent loss of heat through the skin, but it also turns down the production of heat, and so it leads to a colder and colder state suspended animation through a degree. Another universal basic type of reaction is the formation of histamine. When a cell is in desperate dying conditions, it forms and secretes histamine into its environment because the histamine will open up any closed blood vessels and get more blood delivered. Estrogen is another of these short term emergency things. The estrogen in turn can activate the serotonin [24:37] system and cool off the whole energy consuming apparatus, and it can activate the histamine system. And there are other systems like it activates nitric oxide formation that opens up the blood vessels as a histamine does, and it can activate hemooxygenase, which breaks down heme, which had been used to make the cells energy. Now, when it's in the desperate condition, breaking down the heme will provide some antioxidant function. Billy Rubin and carbon monoxide are produced under these circumstances. The carbon monoxide can serve as an antioxidant [25:38] blocking the ability to consume oxygen, and so moving the system into a torpor or hibernation. So it's all lots of inflammation. Lots of wasteful mechanisms to waste and to deplete the organism of energy and further send the cell into a desperate state. Michael, you had a question? Yeah, my understanding is that the glutamate or the accent flavor is stimulating the unami flavor, and a lot of the high protein and other nutritious foods stimulate that too. How is it that the body is able to be benefited by eating like a nice high protein diet? Okay, yes. The hydrolyzed protein and the weight of the soy protein, and a lot of those products are totally big sources of MSG. To Dr. P, how about the flavoring [26:40] side of MSG? Or as much as its natural presence in the diet? In the natural state, for protein is a rare delicacy for most animals. The urge to eat some protein, it's a definite survival urge. You want to build muscle, make new tissue, and so on. But the trouble is when the society provides lots and lots of cheap protein, people get in the habit of not being guided by their appetite and cravings, but just eating it because it's there. And even because it's considered the most valuable food that people [27:41] tend to overeat on protein after they're around the age of 20 or so, as their growth slows down, they tend to keep eating for the 15-year-olds they were. As long as you're growing and consuming, you respond to the signal action of the glutamate and so on. But as soon as you've responded, you go into an anabolic state and pick up all of those individual amino acids and make muscle and brain tissue and make them renew all of your tissues and make them bigger and stronger. But once your size is established, then if you keep eating that same amount, you're going to have a lot of excess beyond your needs, excess histidine, [28:49] tryptophan, methionine, cysteine, aspartate, glutamate, all of these potentially excited toxic amino acids. So when you recommend people consume 75 to 100 grams of protein a day, you're not recommending they consume that all in the form of muscle meat or eggs. You typically don't recommend more than two eggs a day. And most of your protein requirements, you believe, should be coming from dairy? Yeah. And after you're growing up in size, you should try to learn to go by your actual biological urges rather than what advertising tells you to eat. So how many ounces of a muscle protein, whether it's fish, shellfish, meat, chicken, would you recommend is a safe level for adults, grown adults? [29:54] As your metabolic rate slows down, and that happens steadily from puberty, first slows down very quickly after puberty, and then has a level decline, a steady annual decline of ability to make new tissue and produce energy. And so the older you are, the more careful you have to be about having an excess of the especially the excited toxic amino acids. So I guess it's just based upon your activity level and your age is what you're saying? Yeah. I think it was Adele Davis who said in pointing out that gelatin is considered an incomplete protein because animals and people can't grow if they aren't getting the amino acids [31:00] lacking in gelatin. But she said she had seen lots of old women going for years living on a diet of toast and jello and tea, which are practically their only protein being the gelatin, which is not a complete protein, but that was just an illustration of what a very tiny amount of very old person needs. Okay, you're listening to Ask your doctor K. M. E. D. Galvival 91.1 FM from now, 7.30 to the end of the show, the eight o'clock you're invited to call in your questions, the numbers 707-923-3911, guest speaker Dr. Raymond Pete, we're discussing excitotoxicity and monosodium glutamate in particular. We'll carry on getting into some of the other adverse effects of monoglutamate [32:01] in a moment here. I have pulled out an article that was describing the exposure of rats to monosodium glutamate at the neonatal stage severely damaging their hypothalamic nuclei, which resulted in increased body weight, as we've mentioned, fat deposition, decreased motor activity, secretion of growth hormone, and MSG appears to be a suitable candidate for inducing obesity, which leads to diabetes. So this is what we're talking about, what you're talking about, what you've explained from an excitotoxic energy wasteful activity mediated by MSG. Funnily enough, as I said at the very beginning, the FDA is still behind it, they haven't thrown it out, they are still advocating its use or inclusion into foods, and like I said, I was very surprised that even things like human milk and cow milk had some of these, some of the monosodium glutamate component [33:03] in it. It wasn't just the kind of thing we would typically think about, which would be Chinese food, for example, of soy, etc. I wonder if it's allowed to be in products without being listed as an additive, Dr. Pete, do you know anything about that? I think legally it has to be listed. And there you have some alternatives, like calling it a vegetable broth or something, when it's really an MSG extracted from soybean. Can it be natural flavor if it's less than a certain percentage, like some other stuff? Yeah, I suppose so. And then what about tamari? Sorry, before we move on from the MSG topic, tamari is a wheat-free soy sauce and that fermented soy protein, so doesn't that form like a natural MSG as well? Yeah. And so is that something that should be limited in someone's diet? I think so. Okay, so I wanted just to bring out quickly that [34:04] I saw an article again while I was looking at this month's subject this afternoon, that curcumin from turmeric protects against monosodium glutamate neurotoxicity and decreasing NMDA2B, which is N-methyl deaspatate receptor 2B. And I know Dr. Pete, you mentioned NMDA earlier, and that's kind of an interesting article saying that it basically affected this expression in the rat hippocampus, so that's another good plus point for turmeric and its anti-inflammatory activity that it also directly... There are lots of the flavonoids like quercetin and muricetin in coffee, and coffee has lots of tissue-protective anti-cancer, anti-dimension effects that I think are largely the effect of the flavonoid components. I wonder, there's [35:11] probably through a free radical quenching process, yeah. Okay, another article I pulled out mentioned that the vital role of the hippocampus in memory formation and regulation of behaviour showing that glutamate was involved in increasing the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, in the example of tumenicrosis factor alpha being one of them, which contributes the brain damage and the death of neurons. So this gave a mechanism by which that would happen. Yeah, and there's been a lot of study of how the cytotoxic things like glutamate, what they're actually doing to make the cell become more active, and they assumed for many [36:13] of the studies that glucose was somehow able to reduce the uptake or retention by the cell of the cytotoxic agents. But a more detailed study found that, in fact, the cells were being protected by high glucose addition without changing the concentration of a sparcator glutamate inside the cell. But what was happening was that normally the process of responding to the cytotoxin means that the cell is taking up and retaining the excitatory molecule calcium, which it should be an extracellular molecule. When the cell retains too much, it goes into [37:17] the excited, inflamed energy-wasting state. And what they found was that the addition of extra glucose allowed the cell to extrude more calcium. As it continued to metabolize, the calcium was being pushed out of the cell under the influence of the glucose. And apparently, the mechanism for that is that glucose promotes the increase of carbon dioxide formation as it's metabolized. And the carbon dioxide forming the carbonic acid leaves the cell and takes with it the counter ion to doubly positively charged calcium and some sodium. So the flow of [38:31] carbonic acid out of the cell is taking care of the calcium accumulation product, which is a basic cause of the inflammation, pain, and cell death. Okay, you're listening to Ask Europe Doctor, K. M. D. Garberville, 91.1 FM. From now until 8 o'clock, invited to call in, it's 707-923-3911. So let me just quickly outline the typical foods that people will probably be aware or unaware of that are glutamate rich. And it's not a bash at the vegetarians, but it just so happens that hydrolyzed vegetable protein is very high in glutamate. Autolyzed yeast, hydrolyzed yeast, yeast extract, soy extracts, and protein isolate are all very high in glutamate. These do form, without being prejudiced in any way, do form a fairly large [39:39] part of a vegetarian or a vegan diet as an alternative protein source, but they do contain a lot of glutamate. So just to be aware of that. Yeah, a lot of bullions, I notice, even if they're organic, and they say organic vegetable bullion or organic chicken bullion or beef bullion, they have a yeast extract. And I notice if I use that or eat that, I feel like I've had an MSG burn on my tongue. Okay, we have a caller, so let's take this next caller. A caller, you're on the air. Where are you from? What's your question? I live on the Avenue of the Giants, where I pick up trash. And my question is going to take you guys back to the basics. Can you explain that inflammation? What do you mean? Is it inflammation of the cells or is it inflammation around the muscle tissue, and particularly around like arthritis, and just the age and pain to get an older? Okay, Dr. Pete, would you want to briefly explain the inflammation [40:40] in terms of its physical process of that? People in recent years have been talking about inflammation. Yeah, inflammation. As if I'd explained something, but the process of aging obviously involves increased inflammation in every sense we know. But the problem is to see what the basic events are in cell structure and pain, excitation, inflammation, and aging all have these aspects of excitotoxic cell damage and the inability to remedy the problem by making [41:40] enough energy or delivering enough energy. The hemoxygenase, one of the emergency enzymes that produces carbon monoxide, there have been probably 95%!o(MISSING)f the publications are describing carbon monoxide as an antioxidant, very protective, and so on. But if you look at the deteriorated brain in old age, there is more carbon monoxide in it than at any previous life stage. So carbon monoxide presence is a degenerative aspect of inflammation [42:42] and cell deterioration. If you block the formation of nitric oxide, for example a traumatic wound to the head or spinal cord, if you block the formation of carbon monoxide, you prevent most of the damage development of edema and cell death and so on. So the chemistry of aging inflammation and deterioration, it's a complex of things that express the same idea as excitotoxicity and waste and wasteful energy waste processes. Okay, great, well listen, we've got two more [43:43] callers on the line, so thank you for your last call. An administrative note to that, first caller Kevin, we lost your phone number, please call us back. He wants to volunteer for us and we're stoked that he wants to volunteer for us, but we lost his phone number. So Kevin, please call back and here's our next caller. Call away from and what's your question? I think you have a radio. Oh no, the caller didn't listen on their phone like I asked. Oh well, here's our next caller. Okay, please. Next caller, this is you. Yeah, that second call is for call back when they get a moment. So next caller, where are you from? What's your question? Oh yeah, I'm from South Central Los Angeles. I was listening to the conversation and what I wanted to know was how long does the body take to heal from all the damage? Let's say you reduce all the estrogen, the polysaturated fat, all the inflammatory things. How long does it take for somebody's body to reverse the damage? Is there a difference in age or is it the same for everyone? [44:46] Yeah, the young person with a higher metabolic rate can change everything more quickly. The average person, if you move from a country that eats a lot of polyunsaturated fats to a country that eats very little of them, it can take four years to equilibrate to the new balance in the diet. But if you make an extreme effort, like one of the early researchers in, I suppose, the sensuality of polyunsaturated fats, they were going to demonstrate that he would get sick if he ate a laboratory purified diet, absolutely lacking polyunsaturated fats. But about three or four months into the diet, all of his chronic health problems disappeared, or chronic migraines and other symptoms, [45:53] and stayed away for as long as was reported. So in his case, with an extreme avoidance of just one harmful nutrient, his lifelong problems disappeared in just a few months. Wow, so that would be also like if you reduce things to get rid of estrogen, as well. For example, my wife is suffering from fibroids and has had a couple of miscarriages of fibroid. Yeah, with the right amount, for example, a friend of mine who was 40 and wanted to get pregnant, the pictures showed that she had a tennis ball-sized fibroid blocking the end for uterus so that the tubes couldn't open to deliver the ovum. But she took an overdose of [46:57] thyroid, and every month the doctor, besides telling her she was going to die from taking too much thyroid, made an image showing that the fibroid was shrinking, and every month it got smaller, and I think it was about the fifth month it had become about a fourth of its original size, and she was pregnant. So the five months made a big difference, just by using thyroid hormone, natural thyroid hormone, and improved her liver function. And there were so many other out-of-balance components of the diet. Too much iron in most people's food, too much messianine, aspartate, glutamate, cysteine. But by fixing any one component, you can see drastic effects. So if you've fixed half a dozen of these things that are out of balance, [48:03] it should produce just very huge effects quickly. Okay, we do have another call. Thanks very much, you guys. Yeah, you're very welcome. Thanks for calling in. We do have another call. So let's make sure we get time for this next person. If you're listening, you'd like to call in. We saw another at least five or eight minutes, number 707-923-3911, I guess speaking Dr. Raymond Peaks, a caller you're on the airway from. What's your question? Hi, I'm from Arcada. My question is, I have a young grandson who has had two episodes of big intestinal bleeding, a couple of visits to a pediatric hospital with every scope of his upper and lower GI done not finding anything. Figuring is something called mechal some lesion in your small intestine. My question is, could you recommend any foods that would be soothing to the DI tract [49:07] or nutritionally beneficial especially? To people very in their sensitivities, but the first thing to do would be to absolutely avoid foods that have added gums, especially keratinum, but a very high percentage of foods now contain vegetable gums or microbial gums or keratinum, all of which are very pro-inflammatory. And just knocking out those foods can stop things like chronic bowel bleeding. Okay, I appreciate that. Would aloe vera or slippery ohm be some kind of panacea to help be soothing? Or have you any recommendations? I would ultimately figure out what exactly it is. [50:14] A lesion or diverticulum or whatever. How old is your grandson? Nine. That's young. So just straight off the top, I mean it might sound a little mild, but in Germany and in Europe obviously in England where I grew up and I studied herbal medicine, chamomile was the number one GI anti-inflammatory. It's got a fairly pronounced effect in blocking inflammation and soothing the GI tract. So chamomile was the mother of the gut, nurse of the gut, and that would be one of the first things that I would give somebody from a herbal perspective. Obviously, depending on what kind of bleeding we're talking about, gentle tannins would also be indicated from a herbal perspective to gently astringe the capillaries or the other tissues about leaking blood into the lumen of the small intestine [51:16] or large intestine. And that can be as simple as like black tea or green tea? Yeah, black tea would be totally indicated as would many other astringent containing herbs like potentilla. And it's very important to check his thyroid and vitamin D levels because a deficiency of either of those can make the intestine hyper sensitive to inflammation. If you haven't already done it, and I imagine it's been looked at, but obviously his hemoglobin would be looked at because I would imagine if he's had long-term chronic bleeding it'd be anemic. And that's going to be a negative factor for him in terms of his energy and to support that. Plenty of foods that would contain naturally present iron rather than any iron supplement. As Dr. Pease already mentioned, iron is very reactive and it's quite an inflammatory and damaging molecule. So definitely go with foods that would be iron rich in liver. Oh, and avoiding synthetic [52:22] vitamin C now that you mentioned iron that the synthetic vitamin C reacts with the traces of iron in your body to produce inflammation. Okay, we have one more caller caller. The last person who was on the lady with the grandson, if you ever wanted to get any more information from us, you can always email me, andrew at western botanicalmedicine.com, give you an outline of what would be a fairly good diet, and if you want to take it any further we can always discuss it. But let's take this next caller. Caller, you're on the air. Where are you from? What's your question? Hi, I'm a person from Queens, New York. I have a question about dentistry. I would like to know what would you say Dr. Pease are the basic consequences of not feeling a cavity, and is there any damage to the nervous system that takes place if you leave a cavity unfilled? A cavity? Yeah, talking about dentistry and a cavity that [53:30] he's potentially having doubt with, but maybe considering. If the damage is only into the enamel, that can be remineralized, but once it's, if it enters into the dentine, then it really needs to be filled. I think it's my understanding that cavities killed more people than anything else in the middle ages, just because it would rot. Depending on how left the caries well, yeah. Yeah, dental disease is definitely a big killer. Okay, well let me just say this. I think probably I'd like to ask a few more questions. Dr. Pease, I'm not too sure if anyone else is calling in with any questions, but I did want to just get out this information for people to take a look at. You mentioned a researcher, Blalock. Now I looked up this person and in the International Journal of Vaccine Theory, Practice and Research, dated January 2021, [54:36] I saw a very interesting article, it wasn't actually related straight away to excitotoxicity, but the title was Excitotoxicity and Immuno-excitotoxicity as a critical component of the cytokine storm reaction in pulmonary viral infection, including SARS-CoV-2. Basically stating that this hyper immune state secondary to dysregulation of the immune system during lower pulmonary viral infections was ultimately causative in the end for cytokine storm and that's a researcher called Morimoto, Morimoto et al., the people that formed this particular thesis, found that co-injection of lipopolysaccharide, which we've always mentioned as being a very negative substance in the body, plus the NMDA agonist, which is a compound called ibotenate or ibotenic acid from aminetomuscaria of all things. I just wanted to bring this up because on the side, no aminetomuscaria [55:40] having been used as a hallucinogen, certainly very liver toxic, but obviously it has more significant neuronal damage, causative activity through the exocytotoxic arm of the reaction, and the SARS-CoV-2 cytokine storm thing is quite interesting from that immuno-excitotoxic, it's time to wrap it up. Okay, well I do want to say one way thing about the caller who called from New York asking about cavities. We see a holistic dentist in Oregon, in Medford, Oregon, and he recommends Lugl's iodine for those cavities that are just invading the enamel, the tooth rather than going all the way into the dentine, and he said because it's so close on the periodic table of elements to fluoride and it is not neurotoxic like fluoride is, [56:43] it's a safe alternative to use besides being antimicrobial, a low percentage solution of iodine called Lugl's iodine is very helpful for remineralizing superficial cavities. And I'll throw a plug out there for flossing as one wise person said, floss only those teeth you wish to keep. Okay, thanks so much for your time Dr. Pete, I just wanted to read out one last thing before we close the show. Okay, so last month I came out with the same paragraph, I've changed it slightly, but again the Europe has lifted the mandate for everything related to COVID as well as I- Britain, Britain, England, not Europe. The project of the paragraph I just want to read out now slowly so people can hear and understand. Authoritarianism and the age of acceptance have it all and have nothing. We're evolving as a species and with our evolution comes a concept of deranged acceptance. Nature is not accepting but rather through evolutionary pressure, it selects the fittest and is quite barbaric. It takes no prisoners [57:48] as in is quite merciless. Rules exist and nature obeys them. They're set from the foundation of the world which we recently have also learned to meddle with and derange, like viruses and gain a function research and the origins of COVID. The opposite perhaps of the all-encompassing embrace of everything is allowable are the immutable laws set in place which we're constrained to like time, gravity and death. Authoritarianism, like cultural Marxism, is at odds with our founding father's constitution of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, which is a God-ordained decree, immutable and self-evident echoing Martin Luther's famous speech from the Emancipation Proclamation. Like gain of function research and authoritarianism, these are set at odds with their counterpart and are to be resisted with your life. Life demands that fitness be preserved and aims at physical and spiritual health. I put it to you that with increasing authoritarianism [58:51] and draconian legislation aimed at making us happier to coexist with everything except everything have no boundaries and have no morals. I leave you with this. Have at it or resist and live. Until the third Friday of next month, my name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Murray. Thank you for listening. Thank you. you
