---
source:
  series: Generative Energy Stream
  episode: 78
  title: CO2 | Art and Science | Supply Shortages | Killer Austerity | Authoritarianism
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=72Zz0TbfBAg
  kind: video
transcription:
  kind: auto-generated
  author: Whisper AI
  date: 2024-04-12
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: 2024-04-12
completion:
  content: true
  content-verified: false
  mentions: false
  issues: false
  notes: false
  timestamps: false
---
[0:00] Music [18:35] {The AI transcription is missing this section, due to an error.} [42:21] ... there's a novelist lawyer I think he's probably still alive named Cummings who wrote about the progressive politics of the CIA and how they probably even were responsible for keeping Mandela from being shot fairly early because that would have turned the people who could claim to be progressive would have forced them to come out against apartheid so they were manipulating the progressive world by not letting Mandela get killed. Yeah, Mandela gave an interview in the early 2000s somebody from the audience challenged him and said like you're a CIA asset and he said in order to survive in the apartheid prisons in the 1950s [43:25] in South Africa you had to be CIA or you had to play both teams otherwise you stood no chance. Okay moving on and please interrupt me if there's more to say I just had some random questions here and then we can get on to the questions from people that watch this show but Ray I think something you bring to the table is this kind of artistic aspect to science and I feel like what we're living through is the ultimate expression of science without any art to it well like in your estimation how important is that if like a budding scientist or something like how do you merge two worlds together of art and science and something that you represent that's sorely lacking these days. If you try to investigate the nature of the epistemology behind or supporting science you run into absolute junk most trivial sort of arguments and beliefs are behind [44:29] the reductionist type of so called science if you try to follow up the cultural influences between for example the acceptable kind of science that's taught in medical schools and is in medical journals and supported by the government and industry it is essentially a flaky kinds of gossipy arguments absolutely no attempt to have a sound basis of knowledge and anyone with contact with reality that's called an artistic orientation if you examine [45:33] your experience and the causes of your experience you're doing the fundamentals that should be behind science but it's considered subjective and artistic rather than the foundation for any kind of a true objective science. And when you look through J.C. Bowes or Albert St. Georgie or Hans Elie or Otto Warburg or all those people that you know maybe that you aggregate and you express in your own work do you find like a through line of artistic expression in their work as well? Yeah and humor is something that is lacking in ordinary science they can't afford the amount of truth that's needed to experience humor I think Albert St. Georgie said he wasn't shocked that people [46:37] he wasn't shocked he was shocked that people were alive at all given how harmful the environment was he wasn't surprised that they were sick he was surprised that they were alive at all given how bad the situation was but yeah you can clearly see that he's writing that he's like a renaissance man he has a lot of different interests and things like that and that is just not but something like Trevor Marshall wasn't he like a computer analyst or something like that he kind of expressed the opposite. I'm an electrician, electrical engineer the most practical but least intellectual of the engineering specialties. And then when and not to beat the Dead Horse here but when you're reading their work can you sense those things relatively quickly of how somebody is presenting something whether they're an artist or kind of an analytical type? Yeah that's what spending a few years studying literature and linguistics does you can detect hot air after [47:41] the first two or three sentences I think assertiveness is a very dead giveaway when they're telling you something that's 100%!t(MISSING)ruth and there's no there's not even a tiny room for you allowed to question it Yeah level of Do you think the sign of pathology would be the excessive abstractness or or mathematicalization of a particular field in other words they're saying here is the golden rule and nobody can change it and that's the way it is. Yeah exactly the kind of mathematicalization that involves digitalizing everything making things computable was one of the deepest hidden principles of the deep state was to support the digitalized reality behind [48:43] science and math. No analogs of reality because those are interpretations and allow participation but the most authoritarian kind of reasoning comes from the computable absolutely digitalized kind of symbolic manipulation symbols ultimately without meaning because the meaning is always tending towards fullism and combining categories Bertrand Russell I think was the first person to verbalize that distinction and he essentially decided to stop doing philosophy when he saw the [49:47] human sense person Leibniz had the right approach holistic approach to everything like the philosopher said I am I and my circumstance every time your circumstance changes your identity changes and computability starts out by saying no we need a language free of context absolutely contained within the symbols and it turns out that you've at that point exactly lost all possibility of knowledge. So what do you think somebody like Chomsky or von Neumann would say to the already proven even mathematically that reality is non computable how would they continue to defend [50:51] their argument and push forward given that it cannot be computed. He would say your mentality is so inferior you don't believe in MIT. Even though it was Kurt Gödel who proved that or Einstein who proved that they would have no qualms saying this to Gödel or Einstein. When I ran into Chomsky I was a linguistics major in late 50s and I saw what he was doing as probably the most evil man in the world at that time because of the thoroughness with which he said that a language is a matter of abstract categories that are born into us into our genes just like Konrad Lorenz has said it's right there in your genes and can't be changed. [51:55] So Chomsky and Dawkins will make great conversation partners is what I'm guessing. I don't know if Dawkins ever went to such extremes. Were you in the same room as him? Did you hang out with him or were you just talking about introducing his work? No, I was in Ohio State a professor there said with your odd ideas why don't you go study with Chomsky? Okay, this will be an interesting segue but ever since we talked about it last time people have been saying have Ray talk more about synchronicity and so does William James' radical empiricism and the idea that things are never static and they're always changing does that have anything to do with synchronicity? Undoubtedly because it's ways things are [52:59] you can't synchronicity if you aren't open to reality. Is there some level of predetermination in that like oh I'm supposed to be here the universe was guiding me here to have this conversation with you guys right now because that's more of a religious idea right that things are all predetermined? Yeah, I think there are probably things like the formative principles, the morphogenic fields and so on that incline people to put themselves in certain situations in which coincidences become more likely and are more likely to be recognized as productive discoveries. [54:03] I've noticed that routine is a great way to destroy synchronicity or at least greatly decrease it as an experience in everyday life conversely being spontaneous and doing things on the fly so to speak tends to increase such events at least for me. So I think it has something to do with the way the person's individual consciousness resonates with the rest of the environment and when you're under artificial artificially set rules that make you behave in a certain way you can't resonate with the universe or at least you don't experience it and that impedes the learning process. Does it sound about right? It's actually right. And then last kind of more random question and I know you've talked about this multiple times but maybe just to cement it here incandescent red light or kind of a multi-wavelength light versus a single wavelength and I'm bringing this up because people sell those single wavelength devices for such an extraordinary amount of money [55:07] and if they could get an incandescent light which would be superior that might be a good thing to bring up and then maybe you mentioned that the single wavelength might actually be harmful in some way so can you maybe talk about that a little bit? Yeah, the systems are if you analyze the physics of what electronic and optical resonance consists of it instantly goes beyond physics because physics doesn't want to deal with the mechanisms of what the fine scale of resonance is and the specific frequencies are something that just never existed in nature [56:11] and so the whole system is experiencing something new when you hit an absorptive molecule with a single frequency that causes it to resonate. The fine structure of the resonance is always going to be something unnatural and unique and the difference just hasn't been studied enough to be sure that it's even safe and there isn't enough skepticism about what pure red lights are doing but there is data showing that it can make cancer grow where the incandescent or sunlight type of absorption and resonance no one has ever seen those effects from a full spectrum. [57:15] Okay, and let's do a short advertisement here. The newsletter, your newsletter array is available by email now, it's $30 for 12 issues. I'm going to mess this up again over three years, right? Yeah, that's right. And then they can email the same email to obtain your books and so you still have physical copies of some of these, right? Yeah, somebody was mentioning they purchased one of your books on Amazon for $100 and so I didn't know if that was they probably got it to you. I've heard worse than that. And then do you have any idea what stock is on hand, which ones are printed? One that we ran out of first was Generative Energy and one we have most of is mine and tissue and I think there are still copies of [58:19] the female hormones and progesterone and orcumolecular medicine. Our chat is really out of control today. Okay, and progestee from Keenogen, you can email Catherine to purchase that at Keenogen at gmail.com and each bottle contains 3400 milligrams of progesterone and you know, right? People, a common topic on this show is liver problems whether non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, etc. You know, and I know you're not shocked that a lot of people experience poor liver function. What, how is progesterone helpful specifically for the liver? By optimizing the degree of excitation of cells, the same fence mirrors that cause brain damage excitotoxic glutamate, for example, will cause [59:23] excitatory damage to any other cells such as liver and estrogen and PUFA the glutamic acid range of excitants those are all depended against by progesterone and progesterone favors thyroid hormone production and so the energy increase adds to the stabilizing effect. Progesterone and progesterone people have all kinds of liver malfunctions including gallbladder disease and that goes with elevated excitability of the duct and the gallbladder itself and progesterone [1:00:27] relaxes the spastic estrogen. And then I have a paper I think it's calling like low thyroid could be a pseudo liver disease basically and so what the liver obviously needs lots of energy to perform all its functions is that the basic pathology of that like the hepatocytes cannot function properly without thyroid? Yeah, the liver's energy is a large part of it is used to regulate both environmental toxins and to balance the hormones and so when your thyroid is low if you're exposed to pesticides or high estrogen for example your liver doesn't have the ability to inactivate and excrete those toxins and so they accumulate and so if you are fasting and failing to [1:01:31] energize your liver you accumulate those harmful substances that tend to be stored in the fat or are constantly being produced by stress tissues such as estrogen. So fasting like low thyroid function leads to general systemic poisoning experiences from the environment and then pinching estrogen and hormones that get out of balance. Thank you for that and I feel like I had one other question about Obran. People are asking me how do you make it? Do you have any special process for making Obran? I know that's a complete non sequitur. For making what? Obran, is there anything that a person has to do specifically for it? No. [1:02:35] I think whatever tastes best for you is good. I like to add a little bit of masa to it. It gives a rounder flavor sort of like tamales. Amazing. Okay, will Georgie interrupt me at any point? We'll get into the questions here. Okay, could you ask him about dietetics as a form of political control? He has spoken about this previously. What I would love to hear is to hear resources recommended. Is there any books he recommends on the topic? On dietetics? Yeah, like people eat beans and rice for a reason. I think maybe that was from nutrition and for women a long time ago. Yeah, the diet for a small planet was popularizing that, making the political issue that you should economize by making the foods overlap and so on. [1:03:39] It's a possible diet, but they neglect the toxic aspects of focusing only on the exact nutrient content of food. You have to look at the social aspects of it, and especially the toxic components of a high vegetable diet. And maybe, I can't remember, maybe in Plato's book, what was it called? Didn't he talk about like slaves eating bread and crackers and stuff? That food as a form of political control goes back really far, correct? Yeah, this finish enslaving the Mexican Indians and South American Indians, put them on a minimal diet of basically beans and tortillas and saved money [1:04:43] that way, and weakened them and prevented rebellion because they were too weakened and depressed to defend themselves. Wasn't that also like one of the major techniques of the missionaries, the question missionaries that went into these indigenous tribes and they convinced them that together with the religion, they're sinners, they need to repent, that's why they need to eat these crappy foods, and that way they were weakening the local population and making them much, much more easy to take over, to subjugate. Yeah, they were the political wings of the Spanish Empire. And then just to wrap this up, didn't Henry Kinsterger called a food instrument of national power or something in his famous Kissinger report? Like they've known that they could use food to control people for a long time. Okay, next question here. [1:05:47] Thank you for that, Georgie. Thank you, Ray. Does the act of lying and dishonesty have anti-metabolic effects? Does true physiological coherence require radical honesty? Yeah, the awareness of what you're doing and the culture doesn't encourage that sort of thing, but the person with excess energy is going to maintain a high degree of healthy animal coherence and that includes a big control of what take in mentally and physically that they will be opinionated by their needs and preferences, rather than by learned principles. Thank you for that. Sorry, I'm like dealing with the chat [1:06:51] at the same time I'm having this conversation. Okay, Deborah says, please discuss intuition. Or maybe how it relates to the metabolism. Would a person have better intuition if they had a higher rate of metabolism? Yeah, probably. A hypothyroid tired person has a very limited repertoire of thought processes. And when your energy is high you will cycle through different states. Deep sleep, deep relaxation and high intensity conscious activity. And those cycling will take you through a variety of attitudes and experiences and going from one to the next [1:07:55] gives you a broader perspective and out of that bread you can put together things that would never occur to someone who is staying on a level, energy level. Would an intuition be just a way of measuring open mindedness which is a surrogate itself for metabolism? Yeah, open mindedness in the sense of a certain amount of going out of your self curiosity, looking for things to perceive, sort of desire to perceive leads to novel perceptions and novel intuitions. And maybe what we talked about a long time ago, you have like your cultural consciousness and then the animal consciousness, is the intuition more part of the animal [1:08:59] consciousness? Thank you for that. Okay, can he talk about abiotic oil? Yeah, the Mendeleev was the first one to notice it I think. It dissolved iron in, I think it was sulfuric acid and noticed a film, an oily film appeared on the surface and it smelled like petroleum and he gave samples to people who were experienced with actual petroleum chemistry and they identified it as resembling particular natural exudations of [1:10:03] petroleum from the earth. So the idea that iron is rich, it dissolves carbon at a high level and when it decomposes in acid, it spontaneously synthesizes that carbon into that was around the 1850s and he noticed that and it was a long time before anyone else started following up on it. This is the idea that the earth is creating oil and then the powers that be say it's running out or something like that? Yeah, I think the geologist consensus is still that the sander of the earth [1:11:07] has a very high concentration of fairly heavy metal like iron and the capacity of that iron to dissolve carbon amounts to vast amounts of potential petroleum and so you would expect it to constantly as the iron reaches new conditions, volcanic action pushing it in the chemical reactions then you would expect that vast amount of iron to be releasing more or less steadily a huge supply of petroleum like molecules according to what mentally have observed. Did you see the news that they found these oceans of oil and liquid methane [1:12:11] on one of the Saturn moons? I think it was Enceladus it was one of the planets orbiting Saturn as a satellite and basically even the article in the popular press, it was like NewScientist.com or whatever the website is, it said that kind of throws a wrench into the whole theory of dead dinosaurs being the source of oil because either dead dinosaurs were roaming in Enceladus or the Russians were right about the abiotic well theory. Yeah, I run into the Russian research following up decades after Mendeleev made his observation and they were doing calculations showing that the idea of petroleum really has no basis in science [1:13:15] and that it's extremely probable that it's a natural geological consequence of this gigantic mass of iron or other heavy metals. Do you suspect the political nefarious motive here in pushing that theory about the fossil fuel origins or was it just stupidity? Yeah, a fostered stupidity that the oil companies want to maximize everything they can squeeze out of the public in the process of selling their oil by making them fear that it's running out. So they can charge higher price? Yeah. I think Shell had popularized carbon footprint. Maybe it was around before them but they had turned that on the public saying that the climate change was the public's responsibility and not the oil companies. Have you ever heard that before? [1:14:19] That's a general principle that the companies aren't responsible for anything. They're just serving the public. I just thought that was hilarious that carbon footprint was popularized by an oil company like that. He just doesn't get more ironic than that. Okay, thank you for that Ray. Okay, where am I here? Ray's mentioned considering artistic movements according to their energy and context. Is there a particular movement in painting or literature that he considers especially positive? Well it's the alertness factor when it's used to point out truth that can only be perceived easily that way. I think that's the real value of painting [1:15:23] that it shows up occasionally in very different styles but you can tell that the person was experiencing reality in a very complex and constructive way and the viewer gained something from seeing that complexity that someone else perceived and represented. It's like a subtle historian noticing things and writing about them allowing a new perspective on what's going on in the world. Thank you for that. Okay, next question. Does randomness have a place in our universe or is everything just interdependent and can be [1:16:27] explained? The special place in our universe is that a doctrine of everything being random has been used to control whatever it is you want to control. The science doctrine wants to say that all changes random, otherwise that would mean that something in nature itself is intelligent and that idea of an anti-authoritarian respect for the intelligence of the way nature operates, they have to find some way to get people to trust the intelligence of life and of physics and so on. And so the art drew that [1:17:31] randomness is the basis of everything in the universe. Mutations are only random. That nuclear decay is only random. So for hundreds of years people have been showing non-random evidence that has sorted science and culture into the mechanistic based on the doctrine of randomness versus the holistic more or less trusting in the intelligence of how things are working. Amazing thing for that. Okay, next question here. Ray will let you go pretty soon. I think we only have a few more questions here. Okay, what does Ray think of Reich's Cloudbuster? I think he was obsessed [1:18:35] with the misconception. He writes so badly about communism, what is he experiencing that maybe you would disagree with? He writes so vitriolic about it. It was his early experience with the Nazis specializing in killing communists and socialists and wanting to get rid of him along with the... activating the sex politics movement, freedom, sexual freedom associated with political freedom. And that was to the Nazis that was considered just a variation on communism. And I think the stress of being exiled [1:19:39] and pursued and almost murdered by the Nazis affected his judgment at one point when he was in prison when he heard an airplane going overhead he said that that is president Eisenhower keep a watch on me. Definitely unrealistic judgment of what was happening in the world. If I heard you right, he was equating the Nazis with communism? No, the Nazis were equating his sexual political movement with communism because they were killing pretty indiscriminately anyone with descending political ideas. [1:20:43] So he didn't like being associated with the communists and that's why he writes negatively about it? Yeah, he was put under stress by the attack on sexual politics and being lumped in with socialist annihilation. Maybe into the surreal is understandable given what a target he was? It sounded like he had a pretty rough life. Yeah, his interactions with Fred exposed Fred as the cultural fraud that he was that he wasn't really wanting to change anything to take advantage of the way oppression works. Using Freud's whole theory of psychoanalysis is just a very elaborate way of concealing [1:21:47] what the real source of mental health problems in the population were at the time. Yeah, Reich goes into that in detail that Freud is on the other side of the superegal against the revolutionary truth of the organismic perceptions. And it's also like the key to dissolving your problems is always in the hands of this person with esoteric knowledge. And only this person can open the door to your psyche. You can never help yourself, right? Yeah, basically authoritarianism and Reich was essentially anti-authoritarian and he really had an accurate understanding of first he respected Freud but then realized he was fraudulent [1:22:51] in choosing authoritarianism rather than liberation. Does Freud have deep state connections? Do you think he's working for people? Not directly. I think he suffers income was coming from it was the middle class and not shaking things up too much. I mean some of the stuff that C.A. psychologist developed as part of project MKUltra and how to break the terrorists in Guantanamo Bay. It sounds like it was heavily based on a lot of these Freud ideas. I mean they were deliberately making people stay naked, shaming them all the time, right? All of these things have a very heavy Freudian underpinning when I read about what they did to these people. Yeah, and it seemed to be especially directed to the highly moralistic [1:23:55] Islamic culture. They are already an example of right armored personality. The sexual oppression was central to their idea of morality. Okay, amazing. Thank you so much for that, Ray. Okay, we'll get through a few more of these. Ray has almost sounded like he was against monogamy and pro-polygamy from previous comments. What does Ray think of gender relations today? What does he view as the problem? What does he view as a healthy gender relations and solution? Being in a healthy social environment is the first step. The marriage has evolved [1:24:59] from a matter of property rights of men over women on children. As those ownership properties were questioned, then the new problems have developed. So first you have to think about what the society and the economics is doing. Are you really wanting an equal partnership? Or is there still some kind of a financial interest involved? Rich people, Mary Rich people and [1:26:03] middle-class people, Mary middle-class people and they don't like to talk about the property values of marriage, but that's still the main driving force behind the gender interactions. How does disappearing women as a protected class, bathroom, sports, prisons, crime statistics, and surgeries on minors serve particular interests? How do those things, how does the disappearing woman as a protected class and surgeries on minors, what agenda is that? Who is driving that agenda, do you think? The same forces that create a doctrine of randomness, the holistic understanding [1:27:07] of the natural animal understanding of gender and interactions and who we are, that can be displaced and the social rules can be imposed to the extent that you deny the reality of biology. The denying reality of biology fits right in with all of the other authoritarian randomness-based things. If you can choose your gender, it's the same thing as having the random of all of your properties. It isn't growing out of your interior nature. [1:28:11] I know you're not necessarily dissecting every weird sick thing the ruling class do, but do you think that kind of blurring of the lines of gender and stuff is preparing people for their transhumanist agenda? Yeah, basically digitalizing society so that you can be assigned a code number or a gender role and that supersedes your actual needs and desires. I think some of the rise of transgenderism that we're seeing is basically a desperate attempt by the ruling class to conceal the radically declining quality of life of both genders. The rates of homosexuality, transgenderism, cross-dressing, whatever you want to call it, have been steadily rising since the 60s and a lot of it has to do with extreme stress in the environment, poor diet, [1:29:15] all of these certain allergic, estrogenic drugs, et cetera. Now that the public is becoming aware of these rapidly rising rates, the elite is throwing a diversion by saying, oh, this is all completely normal instead of having to explain how come suddenly we have these drastically increasing rates of what used to be pathology? Yeah, I think that's true. Just one more lesson on this. If you're consuming any of their material with what they want to do, and given your understanding of physiology, is it just ludicrous, merging man and machine? That just doesn't sound like it would work just on its face. No, all of this talk about finding biological compatible materials and so on. It's all forniness, essentially everything that's the latest news in biology and medicine. It's essentially fraudulent. [1:30:19] And Ray Kurzweil, who used to be the patron saint of transhumanism, is nowhere to be found. He refuses to be interviewed. Who is that? There's this guy called Ray Kurzweil. Oh yeah. He used to be like a MIT professor or something. He was very active and published a few books back in maybe 10 years ago. And then I haven't heard anything from him over the last five years. And I think several of the large public mainstream media try to interview him and he refused. They suspect he's of particularly poor health due to his heavy experimentation with some of the things that he was pushing and saying they're going to lead to transhumanism. It looks like he damaged his spinal cord or something like that. It's not completely clear, but he used to be the patron saint of transhumanists and now he doesn't want to be bothered by any of that. There was a kind of funny image on Instagram and it was like, I know I'm a little bit early, but I'm also anti-microchipper. Like anti-vaxxer. [1:31:23] Okay, a few more here. Does Ray believe in the renewal of life through a purgatory function of nature? Ray talks about orientating life towards regeneration of self-ordering systems. But what does he think of sacrifices of those systems for the attainment of new fertile cycles of life? It would depend on just what you mean. What you want to sacrifice. I think that question is reminiscent to a one that you got asked a few episodes ago. Is there anything worth dying for? Any idea worth dying for? And I think you said no. Whose ideas would I be dying for? And I think that at least that's the way I'm reading the question. Is it worth ever to sacrifice oneself in the name of a new improved system? I mean I'll let you answer that. To me the answer is no, because you never know for sure who is pushing that agenda. Yeah, the principle of fertilizing [1:32:27] through death has its function. But the idea of sacrificing something existing for something that might develop, it's often the priests are calling on you to sacrifice for something that benefits them. I don't know if this is even the same territory, but like estrogen rising and tearing down a structure, is that a type of, I'm using air quotes here of sacrifice for the renewal of a tissue? Or is that too orderly or that couldn't be considered a sacrifice? It's a built-in process. Growth is always renewing and reconstructing according to present needs. Amazing. Okay, let's see, I have a few more here, but I'm going to let you go. Okay, how about we [1:33:31] end on... Let me just pick one here. We can't done this one. Let's give him for further information about stars being conscious. No. I don't know if there's any source of information on that. Maybe Electric Universe. Do you think some of the orderly signals that there have been publicizing about lately in the news the signals that exhibit patterns that are reminiscent of intelligence and they're getting them from several of these stars that are light years away and whatnot? Do you think some of that may be like an indication of an orderly structured intelligent activity in those regions of space? Yeah, everything is orderly. So complex ordering exists everywhere just a matter of whether we perceive and accept it or not, but I don't think it [1:34:35] implies what we think of as consciousness. Maybe we talked about a long time ago about the whole cosmos being like a gigantic organism or something like that. Maybe that's where this question is coming from. Maybe you said that a long time ago? Yeah, I think so. The T. R. Descher-Dan idea of a noosphere that the whole thing is a calculating system. Okay, let's do ban all these people. We got raided in the chat tonight. Okay, last thing. The newsletter is available by email now. It's $30 for 12 issues over three years. You can order it from RayPete's newsletter at gmail.com You can order Ray's books from PMS to menopause, progesterone, and orthomolecular medicine generative energy, my favorite. Mind tissue and nutrition for women if you email RayPete's newsletter at gmail.com, and then you can purchase progesterone by emailing katharine at kinogen.com, and each bottle contains 3400 milligrams of progesterone. [1:35:39] And final, last question, Ray, what are you working on, Ray? The new perspective on the ideology of cancer, putting it in the same context exactly as COVID and infectious diseases and the aging process, and getting away from the helpless theory based on the mutagen origin of cancer. It's a disease that causes a mutation, rather than a mutation causing the disease. Amazing. Ray, stay on the line. Guys, thank you so much. I sincerely appreciate you guys hanging out. Georgie Dinkov, thank you so much. I won't even say any more final words here. We'll just get off. Okay, guys, thank you so much. Have a safe weekend. [1:36:43] Ray, stay on the line. And yeah, we'll see you guys again soon. Take care, everybody. Peace out. Bye. Thank you. Music [1:37:57] Music Music
