---
source:
  series: Jodellefit
  title: Blood Tests, Hormones, Protein Intake & Ray's Carb List
  kind: audio
  url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=495CtgExBXE
  mirrors:
    - https://raypeatforum.com/community/threads/dr-ray-peat-blood-tests-hormones-protein-intake-rays-carb-list-jodellefit.46793
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-30"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-30"
completion:
  content: true
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast. I'm as usual Jodell and I'm eager to welcome back on the show Dr. Raymond Pete, a regular here and for good reason as you will find out from his vast knowledge for those of you who are new to the podcast. And I think I speak for all of you who aren't new to the podcast when I say he's very much appreciated by many of you listeners. And I know that because I typically reach out and let you guys know that I'm getting ready to podcast with him and ask for questions and the emails overwhelm my inbox. So it's kind of cool. So we will get to as many of your questions today as possible and what we don't get to, we'll go into the queue for the next one. So thank you so much for your questions and Dr. Pete, thank you so much for coming back on the show and answering them. Okay, you're welcome. As always, you guys out there, make sure that you take a moment and purchase Dr. Pete's newsletter, which is one of my most [1:02] favorite things I look forward to reading each time they come out. You can purchase a hard copy or an emailed copy of his newsletter by emailing Ray Pete's newsletter at gmail.com. So I'll have that link in the show notes for you. Okay, so Dr. Pete, I'm going to share something with you. Finally, I had a client who got it. What I mean is after finally cracking down on her EMF exposure, her radiation exposure to 5G and Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, all her irritating symptoms of numbness, tingling, back pain and other inflammation completely disappeared. And I had been trying to get her to understand this for a while. So Dr. Pete, I'm going to start off this podcast asking you about your environment and your EMF exposure because what I know of you is that you don't come on camera. You're always on a phone when you dial in for a call. And so it seems to me that you really keep your device usage to a minimum and you kind of mitigate your exposure to radiation. And so I wanted to know that about you. I wanted [2:05] to know like, do you do that on purpose? Like to not have that, you know, camera and computer always on? And how do you feel about that? What do you think about that? Oh, definitely. It's all deliberate. My telephone is a landline. And they're hinting that they might discontinue that service. And all of my computer parts are connected by wires. And it's getting hard to like subscribing to the internet. They automatically want to set up a little broadcast station in your house. But you can still manage to get, I forget what they call it, an ethernet table. And then each part, speakers, [3:15] the monitor, computer, everything is separately connected to a wire. I agree with you on that. And I wish I live in a camper. So unfortunately, I can't have a landline. But I do mitigate my phone where when I'm not using my cell phone, it's off. It's away from me. I don't carry it on me unless it's in airplane mode, because I'm concerned. Like I've seen people really come back from poor health issues after mitigating their exposure and getting more nature outside, more sunshine instead of always being around this chronic Wi-Fi and Bluetooth that we're exposed to. So I'm glad to hear you say, and it speaks volumes about you because look how healthy you are at what? Are you 87 or 88? No, 85. Oh, 85. Okay. I put you too high. But regardless, that's I think one of the reasons, one of the many reasons why you are as healthy as you are at 85. So I appreciate that about you. I hear from lots of people who are just in terrible [4:20] condition, but who they actually say they look at the screen on their wireless telephone almost all their waking hours. And it's no wonder they're having eye problems and appetite problems. Everything goes wrong when you simply don't live the way an animal is designed to live. Absolutely. I'm so glad you mentioned the weight problems or the appetite problems because it's so true. There's published data on the fact that these devices and the exposure to them actually elevate our insulin and our blood glucose and blue light after dark being on a device after dark can stimulate cravings. So I mean, people don't think that this is affecting them until they get away from it. And then you'll see how different your body feels, that anxiety you feel, [5:21] the inflammation you feel, the appetite and cravings you feel, they might all go away just by limiting your device usage. Would you agree? Right. I see it happening every few days when I can convince someone to just try it for a while. No, I agree 100%! (MISSING)So I'm glad I got your thoughts on that. So we'll jump into questions now. We've got a wide variety of questions. So the first one is from Spencer Steele. And he asks, when do you think it's worthwhile to try antibiotics? And how would you go about it when suffering things like food intolerances, violent reactions and gut issues? So do you think there's a place for antibiotics, Dr. Pete? Oh, yeah. But the natural antibiotics, food, easily digested food will normalize the flora. In most cases, lots of [6:25] un-irritating fiber, the so-called soluble fibers, sometimes sort of the most irritating infection, for example, can make an animal both aggressive and depressed, or a simple fiber like cellulose or oat bran can have an anti-depressed, anti-depression, anti-aggression event. But then if that isn't enough, if you use one of the old antibiotics discovered 50 years or more ago, then you avoid some of the worst risks. Recent antibiotics are able to do things like [7:37] cause your tendons to break and very damaging to your connecting tissues. And so the old ones, erythromycin, penicillin, and tetracycline, they're still very effective. They have modernized variants that are still pretty safe. Azizromycin, ampicillin, and doxycycline or minocycline are still very close to the original old antibiotics. They can produce a beneficial effect in just a few hours, like taking a half a penicillin tablet four or five hours apart, [8:41] sometimes within eight or ten hours, your symptoms will be gone. Wow. And so you're not opposed to more maybe the old-school antibiotics as opposed to some of the newer ones out, yeah? Yeah, it's very important to check the side effects of an antibiotic whose name you don't recognize. Okay. And what about, you mentioned natural antibiotics. Are you a fan of things like olive leaf extract or garlic or um like colloidal silver or anything like that? Some of those have at least as serious side effects. I happen to know a woman who took colloidal silver, I think it was around 1950, and she never appeared in public without gloves and a dark veil because her skin color had turned purple. Wow. That's interesting. Okay, [9:51] so next question. This is a follow-up to our last podcast on the advice about asthma. This individual wants to understand the LOX enzyme and leukotrienes that are heavily involved with the asthma response. Drugs like singular, which antagonize leukotrienes are effective at preventing asthma attacks. Could the reason be that a low blood sugar state will increase adrenaline, which would then increase the activity of LOX? Yeah. Okay, go ahead. Yeah, exactly. I think that's what brings on nocturnal asthma attacks, for example. A lot of people die during the night because of the horrible attack of asthma. Normally, the blood sugar falls during the night just so you can not waste your energy while you sleep, but the falling [10:54] of blood glucose causes your histamine and adrenaline to increase. That combination causes inflammation and constriction to your respiratory tubes. Cool. All right, so they kind of knew that inherently. They just needed your validation, so that's good. Dylan Knight asks, does Ray think that creatine monohydrate supplementation could be beneficial for muscle recovery, brain function, etc.? I would be very, very cautious for sure, not in large quantities, like getting too much protein. Too much of that can increase your ammonia production, [11:56] and the excess ammonia that you have to dispose of consumes your carbon dioxide to form urea and detoxify the ammonia, but the consumption of your CO2 combining with ammonia is exactly what can bring on an asthma attack because CO2 is sedative anti-inflammatory and anti-asma. Yeah, no, I'm glad you mentioned really higher protein diets, too. In your opinion, what is an adequate protein intake? Because there's all schools of thought out there about that, too. Is it one gram per pound of body weight? Is it half your weight in grams? What do you say? [12:57] It depends on your age, very largely. Broda Barnes, when he was beyond middle age somewhat, decided to experiment with the high protein diet, and he had been just eating a traditional farm type diet, and when he increased the protein, he found he had to steadily double his daily thyroid intake. That's been 40 to 50 years ago that he mentioned that, but there's been very little follow-up on why that happens, but if you look at the requirement of a high-quality protein to have optimal growth during youth, [14:03] that drops off sharply as soon as you stop growing, because amino acids like misionine, arginine, tryptophanes, cysteine, and a few other amino acids are used primarily for growth and replacement. When you aren't growing, you note only the very small amounts to replace your skin and hair and cells that are being renewed. There's a great drop-off around the age of 30 in how much protein you really need, and when you're getting excess, [15:09] what these more recent studies are showing is that just restricting misionine, for example, to the very small amount you need to renew your tissues in animal studies, that borderline misionine deficiency extends their lifespan 40%!,(MISSING) and you get smaller increases if you restrict just one of the other turnovers supporting proteins like cysteine in particular, and it happens that individually, in excess of cysteine or tryptophanes, has a direct inflammatory action, [16:13] which can damage brain cells, increase the risk of asthma attacks, and so on. And so our real requirement for these essential amino acids after the age of 30 probably fairly continuously decreases right into old age, and people have noticed for a long time that very old people sometimes go along for years eating absolutely none of the essential amino acids, living just on jello, basically, which lacks all of the essential growth-promoting amino acids, and in the last several years an anti-aging [17:19] antibiotic called rapamycin is one of its names. What it does is to inhibit an enzyme that promotes growth, this growth-promoting enzyme is called an alien target for rapamycin or mTOR, and if you inhibit that by not eating these essential amino acids in excess, you turn off the excess growth stimulus and greatly reduce both aging and cancer. Amount established as optimal amino acids intake, for example, in the old MIT study [18:24] said that an active younger person probably needs about 80 grams per day, but that goes with the assumption that you're eating a regular amount of energy foods, and so if you're eating 80 grams of good protein per day, that situation is also one in which you're probably eating 4,000 calories per day just to maintain your good activity level. If you, in middle age, find that you put on weight when you eat a normal 4,000 calories, people tend to cut back on the ratio of carbohydrate to protein, and instead of having, say, [19:29] 400, 4,000 calories and 50 grams of protein, they will get a much higher proportion of their protein calories from protein rather than carbohydrates. So if you look at a healthy person's ratio, they're burning lots of carbohydrate calories in combination with that at 80 grams, for example, but if you cut your calories by half to avoid great daily excess weight, then you have to proportionally cut your protein basically in half. I've suggested that to people who were having all kinds of anti thyroid symptoms, [20:40] couldn't get their temperature up, their heart rate was always slow, and all of the signs of hypothyroidism were there, but if they just increased either decreased the protein number of grams or increased the carbohydrate number of grams, the latter that they might put on extra fat, but if they keep the ratio at maybe seven grams of carbohydrate to each gram of protein, so your diet would be something like 50 grams of protein and maybe 400 grams of carbohydrate, that raises their temperature, [21:41] increases their heart rate and gets your thyroid going again. Oh cool. Okay, so out of curiosity, how much protein do you think someone like you at 85 eats or how much do you eat? I've been experimenting cutting back my protein, and I find that I don't need as much thyroid supplement to keep everything working. It's hard to not exceed 50 grams a day of protein, but by cutting fat calories drastically, then you can do it, you can eat pretty much all the calories you can hold if it's in form of carbohydrates. Okay, so the next question I stuck in here because my seven-year-old loves you, [22:41] and she has another question for you, she likes to ask questions whenever I do these podcasts, so, and she told me to tell you hello. She asked, why is gluten not great for our bodies? She told me that I might have an answer, but she wanted to know what your answer is. It's one of the storage proteins, it's a particular for certain grasses like wheat, and it stores the energy and amino acids that the plant needs when you moisten the seed, activate the enzymes. It provides both energy and amino acids to sustain the growth of the plant proteins. It's a very low quality protein nutritionally such that if you soak your seeds [23:50] and trick them into thinking they're going to grow, the nutritional protein value increases as is the toxic effects of the gluten or decrease, and the nature of this particular protein happens to overlap with some of the molecules in the covering of insects, insects and some microorganisms, and genetically or immunologically have these similarities between gluten and harmful insects covering, and [25:01] there's a further overlap that under the influence of estrogen, our intestinal tissues also become activated in that so that women in particular are especially sensitive to the irritating effects of gluten. Basically, it's that it's a storage protein rather than a functional growth-related protein. That's so fascinating. I didn't even know that women were more sensitive. I mean, it makes sense because the clients I see, it's always the women that seem to have the biggest gut issues going on or the symptoms related to gluten intolerance such as anxiety or heart palpitations and things like that. So that's really interesting that you've even seen women in general be more sensitive to the effects of gluten. So, okay, next question is, [26:06] AKS111 asks, does vitamin D supplementation lead to magnesium depletion? No, I think it helps to regulate both magnesium and calcium, and the theoretically, there might be a point at which you could have antagonism between magnesium and calcium, but generally they are both quieting, steadying, protective minerals with very similar effects to each other. You can inject them intravenously with a sedating action. Magnesium sulfate, for example, has been used [27:11] as a general anesthesia, and you get a definite calming or quieting effect from the intravenous calcium administration, and both of those are supported and normalized by vitamin D, and there's a close interaction with thyroid hormone too. In the deficiency of thyroid hormone, your cell can't bind and retain magnesium, and the calcium sedating effect is fairly useless if you don't have the ability to retain magnesium as one of the stabilizers. [28:14] And what you would agree that magnesium is necessary for the assimilation of vitamin D, right? We need magnesium to help our bodies make vitamin D? Yeah, and both of them are closely connected to thyroid level. The magnesium is very, very quickly lost if your thyroid is deficient. Yeah, I had that issue when I went through the toxic mold, and my thyroid got pretty much blast in the wrong direction, and I couldn't keep magnesium in enough. It was like I couldn't get enough magnesium. I would still get leg cramps even after 1,200, 1,500 milligrams of magnesium. There are some books specifically on that important role of thyroid in maintaining cell magnesium and holding down excitability and allergies and so on. [29:21] Yeah, do you happen to know the names of those books we could look up? Cherry Aikawa, I think is the name of the best author on that subject. Okay, I'll see if I can find that and put it in the show notes for people too. Thank you. Next question, Sylvia254 asks, what about melanoma and hyperpigmentation on the face? What causes it and how can one reduce it? Not melanoma, melasma, I think is what she means with the hyperpigmentation. Yeah, melasma is pretty much under the influence of estrogen, such as in pregnancies when it's generally charged. There's big blots that have found pigment around the lips and mouth and forehead and cheeks, and it's because of the excitatory effects of estrogen. Very similar other kinds of excitation will cause increased pigment formation. [30:36] A lack of energy induced by anything toxic will defensively turn on melanoma synthesis. Estrogen is sort of the model of a basic irritation and toxic condition of the skin, but you can inject various things like chopped up sections of DNA and create a region of melasma like pigmentation and a deficiency of niacin amide. You can reverse not much of the melanoma effect by applying a high concentration of niacin amide [31:36] in water, fly it every day to the area of melanoma. What this doing is reducing metabolic similar energy deficiency pigment formation happens with exposure to ultraviolet light or ionizing radiation. Almost everywhere you look these harmful excitatory processes, radiation, energy depletion, estrogen excess, all of these promote defensive pigment formation. Would progesterone, could you actually apply progesterone topically to the melasma or the hyperpigmentation to see a difference in that too? I'm often by improving the [32:40] vitality of the condition of the cells. It can temporarily darken the pigment, so I wouldn't use it alone hoping to block the estrogen effect. I better to work from the side right side to get your energy up and lower the estrogen before you try progesterone. Next question, Gina P asks, what are Dr. Pete's thoughts on ivermectin and does he feel that humans should deworm themselves regularly like we do horses and dogs? No, people are not so often exposed to worms and parasites. Dogs and pastured animals are just almost daily exposed to parasites, but people with normal [33:50] washing habits, household hygiene and so on, are very very seldom exposed and the effect of the beneficial effects of ivermectin are mostly from anti-inflammatory actions, so in small amounts it's safe, but it's the larger doses that possibly continued for a long time as prevention, but that could be harmful because in the millions of doses that have been administered, it was almost always in just one or two or three doses to eliminate the [34:55] parasites and so it was never a prophylactic daily prevention syndrome system. Yeah, and so like looking into ivermectin, you're right, there are so many anti-inflammatory properties to it as well as like you can see research on like anti-tumor and anti-epileptic seizure. I mean there's all kinds of things that it affects, but like you're saying it really needs to be done cautiously because long term, I mean are we killing off, when you kill off parasites like within medication like that, are you also killing off good bacteria like would we be harming our gut flora? No, I've never heard of that problem with ivermectin. It's so mainly anti-inflammatory that that's where the problems come in with epilepsy, cancer and parasites, [36:02] inflammation is the whole problem and so anything that will correct the inflammation takes care of the problem. Okay, all right next is Adam catches fish. He asks what is a good protocol for a woman of menstruating age to supplement with progest E? How much per day and should that change when the time of the month changes in order to help with PMS issues? Oh yeah the the first thing is to consider your body temperature in relation to the symptoms and often a thyroid deficiency or nutritional deficiency might be the the real cause of your at PMS and even though you can take a big dose totally knock out the PS symptoms such as migraines [37:11] if you don't fix the thyroid problem it's going to bounce right back and need another big dose of progesterone. So the more progesterone it takes to alleviate a symptom the more likely you are to be hypothyroid or ordinarily the cycling woman should only use it from about two days after ovulation and can continue it up until the day menstruation begins. And that natural pattern is promoting thyroid function while inhibiting estrogen effects and that is protected against a long-range risk of [38:19] cancer from the estrogen exposure. So if you you can give estrogen as long as you're interrupting estrogen with surges of progesterone or a good background of thyroid hormone but you generally don't want to continue taking a dose of progesterone every day of the month because it's the surging effect that specifically knocks out the estrogen cumulative toxicity. Yeah so let that just day 16 like for a 28 day cycle you're thinking day 16 to day 28 doing that surge will help get estrogen levels down even harking back to that [39:21] question about hyperpigmentation like that's maybe something they could try to do to knock down some of that estrogen that's causing the melasma. Yeah but being sure to pay attention to your temperature that the progesterone should increase your basal temperature about a degree or more during that part of the month if it isn't doing that then you probably need a thyroid supplement. And so someone that was taking progesterone every day and they're cycling that may put them at risk for promoting estrogen like you're not getting that surge is that what you're saying so their estrogen might stay high? Yeah it doesn't increase the estrogen but it fails to knock it out. Makes sense you got to have the different variations that nature [40:21] intended us to have so yeah. Okay Eugenie Breda asks Dr. Pete will you talk about your top 15 good carbs list or maybe if you don't have 15 just your good carbs list? Okay orange juice all of the citrus juices, a conquered grape juice, well-cooked root vegetables, turnips, carrots, the well-cooked cabbage family, broccoli and brussel sprouts for example. The non-gluten grains are very safe especially polished white rice, [41:25] a mix of ice, corn or lime process, corn, oat bran. I forgot how many that was but you didn't get. Yeah I kind of wrote them down so I'll be sure to put it in the show notes but yeah that was a good amount I mean you're making me hungry too just talk about it. Okay next one we've got NC girl Ninify asks Dr. Pete does vitamin D increase DHEA levels? Thank you so much. Vitamin C? Yeah yeah I think it does. It's anti-inflammatory and I think that's favorable to improving your DHEA to cortisol ratio. [42:32] Okay perfect. Another listener they didn't give their name they said you mentioned in response to an explanation on the dangers of EFA that although it was counterintuitive it makes much sense to you. I'm struggling to understand how it makes sense could you please expound on your understanding as a person is struggling with Hashimoto's and having recently recovered from colon cancer. I'm wondering how diet compare how your form of eating compares with the Mediterranean diet which is supposed to be one of the best. Could you please elaborate on EFA? Oh it's Gracie's gift that's who asked that. What does that stand for? Essential fatty acids the dangers of maybe I guess she's maybe thinking of like fish oil like a plant saturated fish oil. No there are some very good books that go into a matter of more than a thousand references [43:38] on the question of essential fatty acids and fish oils. The name of one that occurs to me is fishy business. Okay I'll put that in the net. And my website has I think three or four very basic explanations for why the doctrine of such a thing as an essential fatty acid was resurrected. It had been knocked out or demonstrated to be a fallacy in the 1940s. It's just absolutely knocked out nothing scientific left but the seed oil industry was losing their customers. They produced a huge amount of [44:40] soy oil and related polyunsaturated oils to make paints and plastics from. Petroleum displaced that around 1950 and they found that the essential fatty acids created economical fat gain in pigs and other farm animals. So this was promoted that the you know essential fatty acids or poofa came to be advertised as edible because they would make pigs get fat cheaply that led to promoting them as human health foods. A very ridiculous set of reasoning but it incorporated the idea that [45:43] poofa lowers cholesterol. Cholesterol causes heart disease therefore poofa as an essential nutrient should be included in the diet the more the better. Every step of the reasoning was simply an advertisement to get people to fatten themselves on poofa the way pigs were being fattened. So it's a gigantic industrial food fraud all through the 1950s absolutely no science remaining but penetrating just about everything in industrial society. They not only sold it to prevent heart attacks but one particular set of experiments in veterans [46:51] founded on the heart protective diet more people were dying of heart attacks caused by the essential fatty acids and not only that but besides heart disease they were dying from a higher rate of cancer exactly about the 1940s animal experiments that demonstrated all of it lowers cholesterol and the essential fatty acids are the basis for damaging the circulatory system and for activating cancer production. Okay so check out I'm going to put that fishy business link in the show notes so they can check that out that sounds really interesting I might have to read that myself. Yeah there are several my articles on the website about essential fatty acids [47:58] I think one contains about 80 references that nothing is huge as these more recent books have done. Awesome okay I like the next question and I'm going to have a follow-up question after it too because this is a good question Eli asks when estrogen love when estrogen falls within the accepted normal range in a common blood test does this mean estrogen levels are indeed normal for optimal health now I'll add to that you know we got it like I want to hear your thoughts on what somebody would actually get tested because you know there's estradiol there's total estrogen serum what is a proper blood test to see actually the tissue levels of estrogen and then yeah to ask his question are they indeed normal with this range that they give you? My website has the article called tissue bound estrogen and that sites a few articles in which [48:59] they actually measured the amount of estrogen in the various tissues versus the amount in the bloodstream and what's in the bloodstream most of it is circulating as a water-shallowable form either the sulfuric acid a bound form or the glucuronic acid bound form these are inert estrogenically and are leaving your body but if an irritation locally intervenes before these water-shallowable forms have left in the urine the inflamed tissue will bind by entity circulating inactive estrogen and reactivate them [50:05] and a progesterone is a tissue anti estrogen factor that inactivates prevents the inflammation that captures estrogen out of the circulation and that promotes reattaching these solubilizing factors and in a very systematic way lowers tissue estrogen content but in lowering the tissue estrogen it's re-establishing the water-shallowable forms letting it get the rest of the way out of the body through the kidneys and so if you have adequate progesterone you're going to have the inactivated [51:10] forms of estrogen in circulation before it leaves in the urine but if you don't have adequate progesterone all of these processes are going to be in favor of reactivating estrogen in the tissues so that in menopause when your blood estrogen is very low the crucial tissues such as the breast the uterus and several other tissues that are subject to developing cancer under the influence of estrogen these tissues increase their estrogen content during menopause when your blood estrogen is lowest and that's why tissue bound estrogen [52:14] concept is neutralizes all of the medical reasoning regarding the nature of menopause and what estrogen and progesterone are doing. Yeah which makes sense why you know blood work is a snapshot in a week in a month in a day and it's really not always definitive so but symptoms don't lie that's why I always have my clients fill out a symptom burden analysis so really if somebody's looking at a lot of high estrogen symptoms that's where their answer is yeah yeah and the low body temperature is what the second you said is very consistent estrogen lowers your body temperature and lower body temperature favors the production of estrogen. Okay next question is from JD he asks about his your current thoughts on utilizing urea [53:14] and if you think it would be safe to use ongoing or just during an acute period of noticeable edema. Oh yeah it has a well established history for heart failure for example or for brain injury. There's one story on the internet of a kid who is brain injured and losing progress going backwards to losing reflexes and they decided to I think it was 90 grams of intravenous urea that they gave and that allowed the brain to give up its edema this fluid collection and it was very quickly [54:16] back at school with normal brain function or if you've been approaching brain death. Okay next one is Ruth asks I have a few moles on my face when I apply progest E is it okay to sweep over the moles or should I avoid them I'm trying to reduce wrinkles. I've always avoided contact with vitamin E or other oily materials and and molds just because vitamin E's viscosity can sort of seal up the pores and be irritating and so if I have a noticeable mole I will put either a progesterone or a DHEA or a mixture [55:17] that maybe is close as an inch to the mole but the tissue surrounding and that generally causes the pigment cells to leave the mole. Several times I've seen waves of pigment cells with the shape of the mole migrating away from the place where I put the progesterone and for example on my temple I put some DHEA and progesterone closer to my eyebrow and behind the mole the next day I have a ring of pigment sort of like a bull's eye and three days of applying [56:19] new vitamin E and hormone on the other side of the mole I had three concentric rings of pigment leaving the mole. Meanwhile the mole was fading and shrinking and showing that the cells were absolutely fleeing from the abnormal wall heading back into my scalp where their function was to produce pigments. I love all your personal experiences you've had so many different experiences with your health so I love when you share those. Paula has a nice easy question is milk high in tryptophan? I'm trying to consume foods lower in tryptophan but it's hard to get the adequate amount of protein needed. A huge thank you to you and Dr. Pete he literally saved my life. [57:20] Yeah milk is high in tryptophan so you just have to keep that in mind but its effects the excitatory effects of tryptophan are moderated by the effects of calcium the quiet effects and the same amount of tryptophan in meat is accompanied by a very high ratio of phosphate which is excitatory and so from meat and fish for example the phosphate adds to the toxic inflammatory effects of tryptophan and the good high content of calcium makes the milk much safer. Okay very good do you have time for a couple more you doing okay on time? [58:27] Okay great. Tosh Lawson asks I get terrible hay fever despite taking anihistamines working on gut health and lowering estrogen any thoughts from Dr. Pete would be hugely appreciated thank you. Always consider your thyroid status which controls your blood sugar and adrenaline and histamine. And as far as like that DAO enzyme that breaks down histamine in the gut is there a certain way you like to promote that let's say somebody might be low on DAO? No it's really more important to not make the histamine the first place. Yeah maybe avoiding those histamine reactive foods too so okay Vel plays 2.0 now this is kind of a controversial question but I wanted to make [59:28] sure and ask it so there's a website that's called NOFAP and they're helping people get away from porn addiction so he was asking how about help with getting off of porn addiction as well as semen retention? How to get rid of semen retention? I think it's how to I'm not sure he just put semen retention in in quotation so I'm assuming it's maybe he wants to hold on to semen? Oh that's an old Asian medical idea that the yogis who would retain it as long as possible they're calling it the the elixir of life thinking that it was very similar to mental energy [1:00:32] that their actual thinking wasn't too clear but the it definitely isn't good for the health to retain it. If a couple has been married a long time and hasn't expelled semen frequently there's a greater risk of having chromosomal defective sperm cells because of the age of the retains semen. And how about help with like porn addiction are there any recommendations you would have for that? No I think mostly they need a girlfriend. Okay I love your humor. [1:01:33] All right well we'll do one more question here actually two more because the second one is kind of fun um we'll do these last two and then I didn't get to everybody's but it'll show up in the next time we do this so if your question wasn't answered just know that it will be. All right ASK111 asks what do you do for low temperature and hair loss for someone with thalassemia minor genetic mutation? I think thyroid usually helps you know just by warming up your long bones wearing long underwear for example or increasing your thyroid activity your bones are warm and they make red blood cells a lot faster. Okay cool last one here and this is I remember you mentioning these cookies the recipe for the B1 cookies and so this individual minor [1:02:34] is asking can you ask for the recipe for the B1 cookies from Ray? Oh at that time I was using a wheat germ and eggs and sugar as the recipe but I learned that the wheat germ has far too much phosphate and so the effect for alertness and someone who isn't well nourished the effect can be tremendous to have a vitamin cookie along with a cup of coffee plenty of sugar in coffee and cookie but there are much better things than wheat germers the source of the vitamins. I wonder [1:03:35] if you could use like you mentioned the oat bran because you're a fan of oat bran. Yeah actually good cookies. Okay good I'll put a little idea for that in the show notes too okay though we will wrap up with that and I'll let you get on with your day but I know I speak for everybody when I say we so appreciate you answering these questions and I hope they're fun for you too. Yeah definitely new ones. Yeah awesome well thank you so much for your time Dr. Pete and we'll do this again and you're much appreciated you guys don't forget to check out his newsletter I'll have that link in the show notes for you to reach out and get your copy so thank you so much. Okay thank you. All right bye for now. All right. Light bulb moment I have an idea for you how about getting an anti-blue light light bulb that's right you could put these in your house at night and they would not allow any blue light after the sun goes down I have these in my lamps and I really love them because it's like this [1:04:37] amber glow at night that's not offensive to my melatonin at all. Now you may know that I'm kind of a blue light black and glass junkie in fact when I'm not wearing this pair I'm wearing this pair yes and when I'm not wearing this pair I might put on this pair and in case I don't want to wear my contacts I actually have my prescription pair check that out you can kind of see that it's different than the other lenses this one's actually going to have my big thick coke bottle glass prescription in there so that I can wear these and not have to have my contacts in at night so yeah I'm kind of a blue light blocking junkie but what I'll say is that my sleep has never been better and it's as simple as putting on a pair of glasses or using a light bulb that blocks out the blue light at night or perhaps you want a little night light for your kids because here's the thing blue light night lights actually cause [1:05:38] myopia in children that's right they can become near-sighted if they're exposed to blue light after dark so getting one of these anti blue light night lights for the kids or for yourself stick it in the bathroom stick in the kitchen for those late night munchies which you shouldn't have if you're blocking blue light that's right blue light actually stimulates your cravings after dark so by wearing these glasses not only will you sleep better but you may not get those late night munchies that are so prevalent so fit for 10 that'll save you 10%!o(MISSING)ff either your favorite pair of glasses or the really cool light bulbs and night lights every cell needs energy to perform and one way that I like to provide the fuel for those cells and those little mitochondria in there is with methylene blue methylene blue is literally food for your mitochondria it delivers oxygen into the cell on so many different levels and if you [1:06:40] haven't tried it yet I want to tell you about the product that I love from lifeblood so their methylene blue lifeblood.co's methylene blue is my favorite for purity reasons for quality assurance knowing I'm getting a really great product I did a podcast with the founder Adam Marafiotti so please check that out but also check out lifeblood.co and use my code joe del j o d e l l e to save on your purchase of their methylene blue product I also love their magnesium I love their magnesium powder that you make your own magnesium out of so check out all of their wonderful products and use my code to help you save methylene blue is also very antiparasitic anti viral anti microbial so methylene blue to the rescue get yours today well if you've listened to me at all you'll know that I preach protein and protein is the building blocks of every healthy cell in our body and you need [1:07:45] protein throughout the day to sustain really good healthy cell turnover and I get asked a lot what about if I don't have time for protein I can't really get in a meat source it's okay I love a good whey protein and my favorite recently has been this grass-fed wave from iconic protein I love their ingredients I love that they use a monk fruit it's simple ingredients there's literally four ingredients in this protein powder and it's not going to cost you an arm and a leg there's a lot of grass-fed protein powders out there that are like boutique and they're all about you know 50 60 $70 no this guy's going to run you less than $30 and with my discount code you're going to get 15%!o(MISSING)ff so check out iconic protein they also have for those of you really on the go and you don't have time for anything even blending up a protein drink you can get their immunity coffee now you know I love my coffee and this iconic drink is made with MCT oil and all natural ingredients and it actually has a few vitamins and minerals that help with immunity so this is [1:08:47] something I'm going to grab I'm going to add it to my coffee maybe I'm going to drink it on its own it's a really nice way to grab and go so for those of you that say I don't have time for protein now you do check out iconic protein and their immunity coffee as well as their different flavors of protein powder and use my code JODAO JODELLE to say 15%!o(MISSING)ff your iconic protein purchase