---
source:
  series: Jodellefit
  title: Cancer, Asthma, Hair Growth & More
  kind: audio
  url: https://data.raypeatforum.com/audio/57/57258-eda076fef34889eef879401c8c448e7e.mp3
  mirrors:
    - https://player.fm/series/get-fit-with-jodelle/dr-ray-peat-cancer-asthma-hair-growth-more
    - https://raypeatforum.com/community/threads/dr-ray-peat-cancer-asthma-hair-growth-more-get-fit-with-jodelle.45842
    - https://www.ivoox.com/dr-ray-peat-cancer-asthma-hair-growth-audios-mp3_rf_85061982_1.html
transcription:
  date: "2024-04-30"
  author: Whisper AI
  kind: auto-generated
added:
  author: Marcus Whybrow
  date: "2024-04-30"
completion:
  content: true
---
 [0:00] Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast and grab your pen and paper and get ready to take notes and learn from one of the greats because Dr. Raymond Pete is back again answering your questions and mine today because I have questions today. So if you're not familiar with Dr. Pete, he's been on the show several times and we all love him. We love to learn from him. You can find out more by visiting raypeat.com that's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T and I highly recommend checking out his articles, his blog, and also his newsletter. So you can get that by emailing raypeatsnewsletter at gmail.com and so I'll have that in the show notes for you guys to check out if you haven't already done. So we're going to be talking about his newsletter that just came out last night as soon as I got it in my email, I was like immediately reading through it, best newsletter so far [1:02] that I've read of Dr. Pete. So we're going to touch on that today because it blew my hair back. So I'm so excited, Dr. Pete, to have you on. Thank you for coming back on the show. Oh, okay. Very good. Thank you. So, yeah, I've got quite a few listener questions as well and I've got my own questions today based on the newsletter and just some things going on, so I'm excited to get started. As you guys know, I've been banned from YouTube, so this is only available on audio, so be sure to share this with someone you know that's going to benefit from it. They're not going to find it on YouTube right now. They're only going to find it on podcast players, so be sure to share and if you guys have more questions for Dr. Pete, I can't post like I was on YouTube and ask for questions. So if you hear this podcast and your question wasn't answered, just email me at getfitwithdodellatgmail.com and I'll be sure to get it in the queue for the next podcast. So let's start right off because Dr. Pete, your newsletter was like I said, one of my [2:05] favorites. I lost my mom to cancer at 17 and what I do today is because of what I didn't understand about her health and how to help her because I was so young and she did all the mainstream cancer killing therapies and after watching her go through chemo, surgery, radiation, more chemo, then finally out of desperation, alternative treatments out of Mexico that didn't work because her body was too wrecked from the cancer killing therapies. I'm convinced that it was the therapies that killed her, not the cancer. So when I read your latest newsletter, the carcinogen metabolism, it was just phenomenal. One thing that you said in the newsletter really jumped out at me. There are many substances that can inhibit the inflammatory degenerative processes acting at multiple levels and these substances tend to be synergistic so that a great number of [3:06] substances can be safely used at the same time. This kind of supportive therapy has nothing in common with the ruling paradigm of cancer treatment. It is reinforcing the organism's state of health rather than attacking the disease of cancer. That's what I want to help people do is reinforce their state of health rather than attacking the disease of cancer. That's what I want people listening to this today to take home is that there's a lot of therapies out there that are traditional mainstream, but there's also a lot of adjunct therapies that are synergistic and at least could support our organism and our host immune system while they're undergoing these treatments. It's not to say that people can't undergo radiation and chemo and things like that, but I think I agreed with you that they're attacking the disease of cancer rather than reinforcing the organism's state of health, which should be what's most important, so [4:09] I just really like that. Yeah, go ahead. Their basic mistake, mainstream medicine now for about 100 years has been committed to the idea that cancer by mutation is something alien to the human being, but the mutations are the attempt to survive and remain part of the human organism. They are our cells that are struggling and if you focus on killing these cells that are already very weak and damaged, you forget that what kills them kills or injures the rest of the human cells. They are so similar or it's kind of like trying to, it's more possible to kill an invasive [5:13] fungus, but still things that kill fungus or amoebas, for example, are always harmful to the human host. If you look at the very few people who have studied untreated cancer patients, starting as far as I know in the 1950s with the University of California Professor Hardin Jones, he took people who for some reason refused treatment after being diagnosed and these people almost always lived longer than the thoroughly treated people, the people who rejected treatment and since those aren't taken into account, everyone who is diagnosed with cancer essentially gets the killing treatment and if you really did a control, you would compare the absence of [6:25] treatment to a particular treatment, but I've read through many volumes of the cancer research journal and invariably they fail to take into account the possibility that the treatment ever kills anyone. If hundreds and hundreds of articles absolutely insist that everyone who dies, dies from cancer. They don't even consider the possibility that the treatment increases as. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, like you mentioned, it's about reinforcing health. How can you reinforce the state of health in the organism if you're attacking both the good and the bad cells with some sort of therapy? It just doesn't make sense and there's a big debate out there about taking supplements when undergoing cancer treatment, but my job as a nutritionist is to support that host [7:30] immune system and reinforce the state of health and so there's this debate like you can't take antioxidants during a radiation therapy or during a chemo treatment and I can see both sides. I can see how the supplement depending on which one it is could interfere with the oxidant support of the cell or the antioxidant capability that you're trying to kill off with the radiation or whatever. But at the same time, what about all the good? Like you've got this one little area that's cancerous, but you've got the 90%!o(MISSING)f you that's really good. Shouldn't we support that and shouldn't we come at it from a standpoint of helping rather than harming? Yeah, and the treatment industry has covered up the fact that there is no such thing as a local, a purely local cancer treatment. For example, the focusing radiation beam, they say if we aim it at the cancer, the rest [8:36] of your body isn't affected, but experiments show that, for example, they noticed that exposing mice to x-rays caused them to go into heat preparing to mate and the explanation was that they had excited their pituitary. So someone did the proper control and it radiated their feet and found that that caused them to go into heat. And the same with any very serious damage to any part of the body. It spreads signals of the damage to all parts of the body so that in Seattle there was this idea of pregnant women who had a full set of dental x-rays, even though they shielded [9:37] their abdomen, their babies were born under weight showing that the stress damage signals affected every part of the body just from supposedly exposing the head and jaw to x-rays. Yeah, no, you don't hear about this stuff. All you hear about is the different doctors saying this is the only path and we only have this. This is our approach is like kill, kill, kill, and there's so many other avenues. I loved in your newsletter where you were mentioning things like mTOR and things that could inhibit mTOR include caffeine and aspirin and lidocaine and vitamin D and flavonoids. Can you briefly fill us in layman's terms, how does mTOR work within some sort of inhibitory action with cancer and why these things are important? [10:39] Yeah, mTOR is phosphorylating, activating enzyme and this particular enzyme activates all of the growth processes. For normal growth, it's always acting, but all of the growth promoting factors have to know when to stop. If you have stress going on, circulating lactic acid, for example, from any kind of systemic stress, lactic acid is enough to keep the mTOR activating growth processes without the appropriate need for it. And so lactic acid is carcinogenic by not allowing the body to turn off growth when it [11:42] should and it turns out that stress tissues produce lactic acid, so you get a vicious circle. Yeah, and I appreciated that in your newsletter, you did mention, I mean, there are some of the flavonoids known as antioxidants like absorbic acid and things like that, that they can become an issue like reducing agents for stuff like radiation and stuff like that. So are there certain supplements that people can do if they've been diagnosed and they're undergoing these treatments, they choose to go that route? And are there different ones they shouldn't do? Yeah, in the right amount, the antioxidants will actually be beneficial. But when they get inside the cell, a typical antioxidant like ascorbic acid or some of the flavonoids like vice-seton are no longer reducing agents and no longer [12:52] are known by donating electrons, but they become oxidizing agents and keep the cell from having an excess of electrons. And one of the most basic features of cancer is that they have an excess of electrons. The presence of lactic acid in the system, for example, means that your cells have an excess of electrons. If you simply shut off the oxygen supply, you'll shift over to lactic acid production because electrons become excessive and will turn pyruvic acid in the lactic acid and with all of the cell activating effects. And so some very, very well informed leading biological thinkers are still confused on the [14:06] issue. They still think that more electrons will be good for cancer patients, but in fact, the failure to oxidize, meaning that your cells have too many electrons, that's the essence of cancer and why the increase of lactic acid is a universal feature of cancer. Okay, yeah, and so it's best to get flavonoids from food. I love that you said that in your newsletter. Are there certain ones, let's say someone listening to this has been diagnosed with cancer and they're undergoing, maybe they've chosen to go these therapies such as radiation or chemo, where would you steer them? What protocol or suggestions would you give them to help them reinforce their state of health rather than just do the attack? The reason doctors advise against using some supplements like vitamin E [15:15] is that they are wanting to create free radical oxidation, which always results from an excess of electrons activating catalytic iron, for example, to create free radicals. I knew someone who was taking protective substances and the doctor prescribed the standard course of chemotherapy and said it would be no more than I think it was three doses of it, absolutely three doses was all that would be needed, but after three doses he said well we need another three doses and after that three doses he said well you need another three doses and she said I finally got him to admit that he had previously said [16:20] only three would be needed and he explained that your hair hasn't fallen out and you're not an enic and those were the judge, the basis for your judging, you have to radically harm the whole organism before you're satisfied that the chemotherapy is working. She ended up looking for thermal therapy, hypothermia to treat the cancer, which there's a lot of research showing that getting the body temperature up to just a little above 41 degrees Celsius will kill cancer cells without harming healthy cells if you keep feeding the person so they don't get hypoglycemia damage, but she went to a place to advertise hypothermia, but the government [17:23] required that they give a minimal dose they said of x-rays along with the hypothermia and after a couple of doses of the treatment I got her to inquire how they were judging that she had reached a hypothermic state and they told her oh the computer does that, no thermometers involved just absolute mystical computer knowledge and then she asked how many rads was she getting and I think it was 800 rads to her whole pelvis which included the intestine and she was getting classical radiation sickness which sets in around a whole body dose of about 400 or 500 rads, so she had had about three times the dose that causes [18:28] radiation sickness and very quickly after that died from radiation sickness, not from cancer. Yeah it's like logic has gone by the wayside when it comes to our medical system it's just like it's just a sad approach because I think there are protocols and suggestions that people can do to reinforce so like in your newsletter progesterone and you mentioned vitamin D can you talk about that? Yeah both of those systemically lower inflammation so they're just as good for treating COVID as for cancer or psychiatric diseases or or a cold because what they do is turn the body towards healthy energy production through oxygen and by reducing [19:34] the inflammation they are letting the body restore itself. Wonderful now everything. Oh go ahead. Antithystamines are another pretty safe way to do that and in a previous newsletter I reviewed some of the articles showing the benefits of exercise and they found that the good things about exercise that help you maintain good muscles, good hormone balance, all kinds of good health points, they found that only when the exercise was sufficient to raise your body temperature did it produce that anti-inflammatory restorative effect and if they raised the body temperature to that point the same temperature that adequate exercise produces [20:43] they got just as much anti-inflammatory effect so it's the body temperature falling below normal that is a basic activator of inflammation and all of the major carcinogens by reducing oxygen metabolism lower the body temperature and so necessarily result in systemic inflammation. So important to keep that thyroid working and keep that body temperature where it should be in cancer prevention then that sounds like so going back to the vitamin D I kind of had something I wanted to really bring up because there's controversy out there a lot of people are not on the bandwagon of vitamin D supplementation they feel like you should just get it from the sun but what about these as a nutritionist I'm seeing people that as much as I would love them to go [21:43] outside they're going out covered up they're wearing sunscreen or maybe they're only going out long enough to walk around the block so there's not to mention the fact that there's published data that now there's nanoparticles being sprayed in our atmosphere they're blocking the sun's rays so that leads me to believe that we do need some form of vitamin D supplementation in certain people that just will not go outside what about what are your thoughts on that I mean are you for vitamin D with K2 supplementation or do you feel like it should just be from the sun? I ideally it would be from the sun but I've talked to people in Saudi Arabia and Latin America there's a tremendous like an epidemic or worse of vitamin D deficiency in the traditionally Muslim and Catholic countries women in particular well the Saudi Arabians even the men were [22:51] pretty much total body covers but the women don't let any skin be exposed to the sunlight and so they have a terrible vitamin D deficiency the same in Mexico people are even the new generations that aren't following the pretty old cover-up practices they have dark skin and don't want to get a darker skin and so they just for cosmetic purposes like to be protected from the sun and I used to sunburn terribly from I guess my 20s through my 60s at 7,000 feet altitude I could get an intense sunburn in about five minutes [23:57] of sun exposure but after I started supplementing vitamin D the next time I was in Mexico at over 7,000 feet altitude I found that I didn't sunburn at all I could work outside for hours without turning bright red and I've heard other people say that that when they take vitamin D they can then expose themselves to the sun without burning or even just a moderate degree of tanning so if you are avoiding the sunlight for some reason then you absolutely need to supplement vitamin B and it it turns out all of the protective anti-inflammatory processes [24:58] I agree I mean I would love like you said ideally I would love all of my clients to spend as much time outside that they can but it's just it seems like I can't get people to do that so the next best thing is like I find a good quality vitamin D to get them on and yeah like you said myself included I don't burn also I think that's due to low poofas I have found that eliminating poofas a long time ago I don't burn and I think that has a lot to do with the body's inflammatory response with the sun too would you say yeah polyunsaturated fatty acids act as an antenna ultraviolet light excites those molecules causes them to have excitatory excited electrons that then spread inflammation to other less sensitive substances so they're like the antenna [25:59] to spread ultraviolet damage if you have a rabbit experiment years ago they shaved rabbits and exposed them to ultraviolet similar to sunlight and the ones the rabbits that had a poofa free diet didn't get wrinkly skin the ones on a high polyunsaturated fatty acid diet got very wrinkled after exposing their skin to sun to radiation ultraviolet nice yeah go ahead what do you think I just there are several things that will will sensitize you with a bad diet high and poofa is one of the most age-promoting factors absolutely yeah so I wanted to ask one more thing before we jump into questions because in your newsletter there was something that stuck [27:03] out to me that I kind of just briefly touched on but I wanted to get your thoughts on it so you had mentioned that although the great majority of cancers have clear environmental causes the carcinogenic pollution caused by governments and large corporations is ignored and so it's like putting the blame on the defective genes of the victims so I wanted to talk about the pollution caused by governments now I had mentioned that I am seeing data on the fact that there is grid patterns in our sky there's these clouds that make an x there's lines in the sky that they're clearly spraying something into our atmosphere there's published data on it do you think that this is something we need to be concerned about that whatever the nanoparticles that they're spraying are dimming our sun's rays and is this part of that heavy metal pollution we're exposed to depending on what they're spraying that has been planned research [28:07] for a long time Bill Gates was one of the promoters of it and when the public heard about it they said oh it's just research we don't really plan to go ahead with that but I don't believe them I'm sure they're continually working on it yeah I want people to be aware I want you guys to start looking up and just doing your own research because I think they've got us programmed to look down at our phones so we don't see what's going on in our skies but I highly recommend checking out geoengineeringwatch.org because there's a lot of published data there and it's not conspiracy because there's there's research on it so just be aware there's changes in our sky that are affecting our health too and I believe some of that heavy metal nanoparticles could be part of that carcinogenic pollution that you're talking about too and one source of pollution [29:09] that is often forgotten or covered up is that the Pentagon is the world's biggest single source of pollution that they can dump anything they want to anywhere they want to and they've killed and injured many military people the Gulf War syndrome was just part of it but burning toxic agents in open dumps in when a war is going on the soldiers are being horribly exposed to these toxins wow yeah something that's I'm glad you brought that up I'm going to look into that too because I wasn't even aware of that so well I think we will jump into questions here because I could talk to you about this stuff all day but I know everybody wants me to get to their questions so Kylie is our first one on the list today she asks or she's kind of explaining that [30:16] she has low TSH free T3 is low free T4 is low she's tried cytomel and NDT but immediately she lost her period it took her five months to get her period back while on cytomel but she was still hyper symptomatic so she stopped it she's had thyroid issues her whole life so she's wondering if it was her nervous system that needed to adjust should she have stayed on it or is there something else she should do Dr Pete it's important to know that the function of T3 partly is to improve oxidation that your liver needs to maintain the continuous activation of the thyroid and to make your liver able to detoxify hormones that are in excess and so you can if [31:16] you have heavy menstruation or continuous hemorrhaging you can turn it off quickly by increasing your T3 intake but normally the body produces only probably a maximum of two or three micrograms per hour of T3 by its own conversion from thyroxin and people often the worst thing is to start out taking maybe your whole base dose all at once on an empty stomach before breakfast and that for sure will give you the message goes to your liver that you have a gigantic excess of thyroid and so you activate the liver to get rid of the excess thyroid and that means that after doing that for a while [32:19] just a couple weeks there's enough to see it happening your liver in just 12 hours after you have taken that one morning dose your liver will create extreme hypothyroidism because it has learned to get rid of the excess but then when you don't keep adding it your liver pushes you to a very low level that's one of the reasons a mixed product like a natural desiccated thyroid a product like arm or thyroid USP for example has a reasonable balance the same balance that you would normally produce with your own thyroid or a synthetic such as seno plus or [33:22] about four or five parts of thyroxin to each part of T3 so the T3 can activate your processes and the T4 is available to continue to keep up your T3 level without at any time forcing you into the hyperthyroid state that you get when you take even 10 micrograms of cytomel at once will give you the signal of excess that will lead to reduced thyroid function. Yeah and she didn't specify how much she was taking so that's another thing you know maybe if she started with too high of a dose and then also like since the NDT is going to have some T3 in there along with the cytomel maybe it was just too much for her and she should just look at starting with like a really low you know five micrograms of [34:22] the cytomel or something what do you think about that? Yeah five micrograms with a meal is okay it's more than you would want on an empty stomach but the meal slows its absorption over a period of about two or three hours and it's very important to check things like your temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure and so on and to not expect things to be normal immediately. What's for changes to gradually increase over a period of two weeks or more and many people want to see quick results and that leads up to getting very disturbed ups and downs of the metabolic rate that makes it very hard to find the right level [35:25] so traditionally people who have really studied thyroid function like brutal barns would take several months usually to determine what their correct dose was and the correct dose varies typically fourfold just by seasonal changes in day length. I found that in the winter I needed two grains of armor thyroid to maintain my temperature and heart rate and that gradually as starting in the spring decreased to half a grain per day to maintain the same level of function and metabolic rate. Nice yeah that's it I like that you mentioned the part about her taking it with a meal because I think there is a misconception out there my most [36:28] thyroid medications are told to take you know on an empty stomach right when you wake up 20 to 30 minutes before eating and I like that you're what you're saying is they really need to take it with food I've always thought that that that would be more efficient slowing down how quickly it's absorbed and so that makes a lot more sense than on an empty stomach. I've heard practically all pharmacists and doctors give that take it on an empty stomach in the morning recommendation but I tried to find out what their reasoning was. There is no reasoning that they based their thought on how do you get efficient absorption they want to think about not wasting any of the thyroid so you do get the full amount that you have consumed if your stomach is empty it shows up in your bloodstream right away [37:35] but the thyroid never works that way naturally it it seeps out as you need it so if you have enough food to keep your blood sugar up and your stress hormones low your body will continue to convert thyroxin to T3 exactly the right amount but it is a continuous moment by moment process absolutely without any biological sense to recommend taking your day's dose on an empty stomach. Okay so next question Zed asked okay this is kind of a long question here so Dr. Pete was asked in the past if he believes one can regrow hair back to their juvenile hairline he replied that it may not be possible I would love to know if someone was willing to [38:35] dedicate all of their time to this this is a cool guy what further steps could be taken after addressing TSH temperature vitamin D and calcium for example microneedling scalp massage or even hanging upside down maybe a high dose of vitamin K to decalcify the scalp anything that he thinks could help thank you so much. Scalp massage definitely helps hair loss from a variety of causes even alopecia ariata can be helped by massage even though that's an autoimmune spotty a loss of hair the massage helps to normalize getting the cell energy back up but I've never known any single individual who wanted to put in the necessary time really could [39:41] it involve basically everything you do but it isn't benefiting only your scalp because people you've probably heard of the ear lobe crease people people who are bald have a very high incidence of a crease across their ear lobe and that crease happens to be an indicator of susceptibility to heart disease and so there's a known association between circulatory system health and good hair growth so the things that help to restore the health of your follicles are also helping every other part of your body. I love that I think it goes back to like grandma's [40:42] logic of like brush your hair a hundred times because people I think they're afraid when you're losing your hair you're kind of afraid to brush your hair because you think it's gonna you're just going to brush it and pull it out but we just brushing your hair like a scalp massage or you know there's a company that makes a derma tool for your head where you just kind of like stimulate the scalp I think those are going to be more beneficial because what you're doing is you're drawing blood to that area increasing circulation so you know like brushing your hair you might yeah you might lose some hairs the first few times you do it but then you're going to start stimulating that blood flow and hopefully improving the hairline as well yeah yeah and putting your fingers on your scalp without moving them against the skin but wiggling your fingers so that you're moving the skin around that kind of 15 minutes per day and that amount of massage can very significantly improve hair growth [41:47] getting your temperature getting your temperature up to normal I think is a big part of it I looked at the normal range of temperatures in the brain and it happens that the highest temperatures are towards the middle and rear of the brain and that for best functioning the highest part of the brain the frontal lobes of the cortex have to be slightly cooler than the central part of the brain they have to be able to be quiet rather than overactive and the hair cover at the top and back of your head is helping to insulate your your head so that [42:51] you don't lose a temperature so easily before you have heavy hair growth but the fact that hair doesn't grow on the forehead is probably associated with the fact that your frontal lobes should be cooler and so your forehead is like a radiator that helps to maintain that gradient of temperature inside your brain optimizing your prefrontal cortex functions well I really love that my brain is really warm right now because you you make me think so much so like just listening to you share that your knowledge like makes my brain like feel warmer so that's cool okay so Zed had one more question in his email he said when my heart rate increases after exercise gets a little strenuous the inside of my nose becomes very cold and painful to breathe [43:53] through and almost closes up does Dr. Pete know what could cause this and how to avoid it yeah that's too much adrenaline at different I used to notice that if I was in a study project for example and went too long drinking coffee I would get that sensation but my nose membranes dried out and cooled and my sinuses extended that feeling of too much air in contact with them I think is that the high adrenaline simply reduces circulation to your nose and sinus membranes sounds like maybe his in his exercise maybe not as strenuous maybe just moving your body without getting too much adrenaline going yeah I yeah not doing things that [45:01] are and to raise your heart rate too much but the kind of muscle exercise that heats up your muscles and then they heat your whole body and increase the temperature so listing weights or using dumbbells enough to warm up your muscles raise your body temperature won't necessarily make you breathe any harder yeah excellent love that okay so I can't pronounce this name but this it starts with a K and it says what are Dr. Pete's thoughts on high dose vitamin E is it safe to take up to 3000 I use per day thank you there have been tests and it was right around 3000 or 4000 units a day that would cause [46:01] the vitamin E to produce diarrhea it was simply a physical overload that probably irritated the intestine and they found that you couldn't absorb above a certain limit it produced diarrhea and was useless but they didn't see any damage from doses up to that point but you have to remember that the product they call vitamin E has changed pretty continuously through technology the 20s and 30s when it was known as a fertility of vitamin that's where the name came from toco for all offspring bearing and so a deficiency was defined as the sterility level [47:03] and that worked because vitamin E protects against estrogen estrogen is the anti progesterone anti fertility agent and so progesterone and vitamin E were found at the late 1930s to be working together to protect against estrogen and so to improve fertility and the side effect many other changes but at that point for various reasons the estrogen industry didn't want vitamin E to be known as an pro fertility anti estrogen chemical so they promoted the idea that it's nothing but an antioxidant and so for years vitamin E was defined as its antioxidant potency [48:12] which corresponded to the D-alpha tocoferol concentration and the total vitamin E effect was considered only the antioxidant potency and for time the vitamin E value was defined as the D-alpha tocoferol content now it has changed again and so they specify the proportion of all of the isomers of vitamin E and the definition has changed and along with it the way they prepare the vitamin and so it's the way it's prepared is extremely different for example the octocosin portion used to be an major part of the function [49:16] and now that it's removed changing the consistency of the vitamin E and also apparently reducing its biological values so that starting 20 or 30 years ago there has been a campaign to warn people about the potential dangers of high intake of vitamin E and since the benefits were established with different different products and different definitions about 60 or 70 years ago we don't really have any good research evaluating what's going on with present products of vitamin E so I think it's best to be very cautious with your dosing. Very good okay so DopaCiva or DapoCiva maybe is the name asks about Blackstrap molasses unsulfurred is it a good source of carbs potassium and minerals thanks a million. [50:22] Years ago I noticed that it had sort of a smoky taste and so I investigated how it's made and when you put your crude cane juice through the crystallization process the brown stuff gradually it doesn't crystallize and so as you crystallize the pure sucrose molecules you're separating a gummy brown substance and it turns out that the standard way to make sugar is to burn the cane fields and then to cut down the bare stalks and grind that up to make your cane juice and if you burn the cane before you extract the sugar you're going to get [51:27] a lot of smoky material mixed in with the various nutrients that produce the brown stuff and so heat over exposure to heat will also cause the amino acids in the natural cane juice to react with the glucose in the juice that produces toxic brown material and so the brownness at least reflects the heat breakdown products involving amino acids and probably most often involves some smoke resulting from burning the cane so the fact that a lot of people have an allergy-like reaction to Blackstrap I think could steer people away from it. Okay good to know all right these last couple of [52:34] questions here we'll take and then we'll save the rest for next time since we're running short on time here but these last questions are related they're both asthma questions so Constantine asks hi Dr. Pete I'm a 23 year old male and I've had bad asthma since I was two my asthma is serious enough that I need to use some type of inhaler daily when it's very bad I use an inhaled corticosteroid and when it's more manageable I use a rescue inhaler that is androgenic agonist I know these are both harmful drugs to use daily so I would very much like to get off of them I've been experimenting with syproheptidine, pregnant alone, and progesterone as alternatives but none have been able to prevent me from needing my asthma inhaler. Do you have any ideas on what I can do to get off the inhaler or alternatively on what I can do to mitigate the harm done by using the inhalers? I'm checking your foods a very careful elimination diet can usually identify foods [53:48] that make the symptoms worse by stimulating different parts of the intestine researchers have found that you can produce all sorts of psychosomatic conditions everything from asthma to migraines to epilepsy can be provoked by irritating certain parts of the intestine and so constipation, diarrhea of some types and anything that tends to cause pressure or irritation in the lower intestine is a major cause of asthma and so looking for foods that are hard to digest you can often get a good diet by eliminating certain foods for example [54:51] green salads lettuce or spinach leaves that aren't cooked are extremely irritating to the intestine promote bacterial growth and the toxin production as well as just a direct irritation from the nature of the leaf and sometimes simply eliminating salads and undercooked vegetables will do it the right kind of fiber will sometimes stop the whole problem by getting food to move through you faster before it can reach that degree of pressure and irritation that's so interesting yeah I would definitely second that the gut is always a good place to go when dealing with anything that's you know causing a reaction in the body as well as [55:52] the how about balancing blood sugar do you think that would matter if he's going the long stretch of time without eating would balancing his blood sugar would that help the body calm down too exactly the both the chemical irritants and the mechanical irritants are ineffective if you have high blood sugar or adequate blood sugar but for example if you have a an inflatable balloon in the animal's intestine and the animal has good blood sugar if you blow up the balloon nothing happens but if it's blood sugar is a little on the low side you blow up the balloon you can produce instant asthma symptoms because the autonomic nervous system is destabilized by low sugar same with allergens but low blood sugar makes you allergic to more things yeah I [56:56] would agree with that too so Ruth also asked a question on asthma she said what are Dr. Pete's views on the use of those inhalers her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes throughout the night as well what are your views on inhalers and why her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes what is interrupted by the hot flashes sleep yeah her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes throughout the night yeah progesterone by maintaining your body temperature and oxygen used during the night will improve the depth and restfulness of your sleep if your progesterone is low and usually if your thyroid is low your blood sugar is unstable falls too low during the night and will trigger all kinds of symptoms hot flashes night sweats [57:57] nocturnal asthma and nocturnal epilepsy are very well known consequences of the falling blood sugar during the night painful things become more painful at night because of falling blood sugar yeah for sure yeah definitely the progesterone can help with hot flashes just in general in the night so um there was something else that you said that made me want to oh what were you going to say uh experimenters have used something like a cup full of corn starch as a way to give pure carbohydrate at bedtime and I found that even though that was not good nutrition it would prevent the hot flashes by giving you a constant supply of glucose during the night that's so interesting like I've had myself included people mentioned [58:58] that corn in general it seems like they sleep better when they have corn for dinner do you have any thoughts on this because I don't really love corn for the fact of it does it seems to be a food that can elevate blood sugar sometimes too high in certain people but you know I'm hearing that it actually can help with sleep would you have any reason why yeah it doesn't have for example gluten if they're eating corn they might stop eating so much wheat and gluten and especially if the corn is in the form of tortillas or lime processed corn that becomes very anti-inflammatory uh just having some oat bran oatmeal or oat bran mush at bedtime those are often very protective keeping your blood sugar [1:00:02] up that's so interesting yeah I don't have corn very often but I find that if I have it for dinner like you mentioned like homemade corn tortillas or something it's like my sleep is just phenomenal so I find that interesting okay that's all we have for today because we'll wrap up here and we'll save the rest for next time but Dr. Pete this is always so enlightening and educational and I love hearing your views on so many different topics so we'll get to more questions next time but you guys check out his newsletter that's rey Pete's newsletter at gmail.com if you missed this one if you haven't signed up yet I highly recommend going ahead and ordering it and maybe just shoot him an email and I bet they'll send that one to you that they just put out because it is really excellent Dr. Pete that carcinogenic metabolism was was really a big eye opener so thank you for that and thank you for being a part of this today okay thank you okay bye for now we'll talk soon bye [1:01:11] hey guys are you in the midwest are you in the east coast are you in brazil are you in asia it doesn't matter where you are I would love to work with you as your nutritionist and so just to let you know I offer nutrition consulting worldwide you can work with me anywhere I have clients all over the world and I love to spend time over the internet with each one of them figuring out their specific needs so your specific needs what deficiencies are you having what symptoms are you dealing with daily that we can address for you so that's what I as a nutrition detective like to get to the bottom of I ask you a ton of questions we meet over zoom or over face time whatever is convenient for you and we discuss all of your specific needs if you would like to work with me just shoot me an email getfitwithjodell at gmail.com let's get fit g-e-t-f-i-t-w-i-t-h-j-o-d-e-l-l-e at gmail.com and let's set up a 15 minute free call for you just to see if I'm a good fit for you [1:02:14] as a nutrition therapy practitioner again email me getfitwithjodell at gmail.com and let's get you set up feeling better lose that unwanted weight that you have going on lose those symptoms that you have hanging around and optimize your health as best we can so a common question I get is what are some of my favorite supplements that I take daily well here are my faves just to name a few I love a good magnesium glycinate for stress and sleep I love a good multi-mineral to make sure I have all the raw materials for my thyroid and my metabolic processes I like bcaas branch chain amino acids when I can't get to adequate protein in the midst of a busy day and I never go a day without my vitamin d3 and k2 drops under my tongue you know supplements can be pricey and in a perfect world wouldn't it be nice to have a healthcare practitioner [1:03:18] assign your specific supplement needs to you and find the one bio individual supplement needs that match your body well that's where full script comes in my online supplement dispensary full script is where I can recommend the perfect supplements for you when we consult but also if we don't consult you can simply go to my full script online dispensary and find all of your favorite supplements at 15 to 20 off what you would normally pay in the store so full script has lots of my favorite brands like quick silver scientific and neutrosol and apex energetics and so much more hundreds more in fact even protein powders teas toothpaste and natural beauty products really great brands that I myself love and recommend so to try my full script out for yourself here's a couple of options you can number one click the link in the description to visit my full script page or you can enter us dot full script dot com slash welcome slash j fitswater [1:04:20] let me say that again that's us dot full script f u l l s c r i p t dot com slash welcome slash j is in jordell fitswater f i t z w a t e r or if that's too long and lengthy you can email me at getfitwithdrodel at gmail.com and I can set you up with a free full script account where I can help navigate the right supplements for you so full script is discreet with fast shipping that drops right to your doorstep no more running out to the local natural health food store when times just not on your side the world is simply does not offer enough raw materials naturally anymore to combat the modern stressors and that's why finding the right supplements that work can and will help you try my full script today save money and start feeling better i'm a simpleton really but I will say when it comes to skincare and hair care that there [1:05:20] are a couple products that I can say have really moved the needle for my skin and hair and also are easy to use they smell fantastic and they're all natural and that is amary giani skin care and hair care amary giani is a wild crafted herb based skincare line and recently they've launched a new shampoo and conditioner line which is phenomenal my hair has never felt better so if you're looking for really great wild crafted herbal based skincare I can't say enough about amary giani I love their charcoal mask and their pearl illuminating mask I'm a sucker for masks whenever I just want to feel like I'm having a spa day and giving myself some vitamin p right and so this is something you can get really inexpensive they've got a nice little trial kit you can pick up for as little as 1999 and it comes with a slew of little tiny travel toiletries you can take with you from their cleanser to their anti-aging serum to the little masks I love them and by the [1:06:26] way you can also purchase small amounts of their shampoo and conditioner to give it a try before you buy the big ones so check out amary giani skin care I've got a link in the show notes below and get this special trial offer that's only good for a limited amount of time try my favorite skin care I think it'll become your favorite skincare too [0:00] Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast and grab your pen and paper and get ready to take notes and learn from one of the greats because Dr. Raymond Pete is back again answering your questions and mine today because I have questions today. So if you're not familiar with Dr. Pete, he's been on the show several times and we all love him. We love to learn from him. You can find out more by visiting raypeat.com that's R-A-Y-P-E-A-T and I highly recommend checking out his articles, his blog, and also his newsletter. So you can get that by emailing raypeatsnewsletter at gmail.com and so I'll have that in the show notes for you guys to check out if you haven't already done. So we're going to be talking about his newsletter that just came out last night as soon as I got it in my email, I was like immediately reading through it, best newsletter so far [1:02] that I've read of Dr. Pete. So we're going to touch on that today because it blew my hair back. So I'm so excited, Dr. Pete, to have you on. Thank you for coming back on the show. Oh, okay. Very good. Thank you. So, yeah, I've got quite a few listener questions as well and I've got my own questions today based on the newsletter and just some things going on, so I'm excited to get started. As you guys know, I've been banned from YouTube, so this is only available on audio, so be sure to share this with someone you know that's going to benefit from it. They're not going to find it on YouTube right now. They're only going to find it on podcast players, so be sure to share and if you guys have more questions for Dr. Pete, I can't post like I was on YouTube and ask for questions. So if you hear this podcast and your question wasn't answered, just email me at getfitwithdodellatgmail.com and I'll be sure to get it in the queue for the next podcast. So let's start right off because Dr. Pete, your newsletter was like I said, one of my [2:05] favorites. I lost my mom to cancer at 17 and what I do today is because of what I didn't understand about her health and how to help her because I was so young and she did all the mainstream cancer killing therapies and after watching her go through chemo, surgery, radiation, more chemo, then finally out of desperation, alternative treatments out of Mexico that didn't work because her body was too wrecked from the cancer killing therapies. I'm convinced that it was the therapies that killed her, not the cancer. So when I read your latest newsletter, the carcinogen metabolism, it was just phenomenal. One thing that you said in the newsletter really jumped out at me. There are many substances that can inhibit the inflammatory degenerative processes acting at multiple levels and these substances tend to be synergistic so that a great number of [3:06] substances can be safely used at the same time. This kind of supportive therapy has nothing in common with the ruling paradigm of cancer treatment. It is reinforcing the organism's state of health rather than attacking the disease of cancer. That's what I want to help people do is reinforce their state of health rather than attacking the disease of cancer. That's what I want people listening to this today to take home is that there's a lot of therapies out there that are traditional mainstream, but there's also a lot of adjunct therapies that are synergistic and at least could support our organism and our host immune system while they're undergoing these treatments. It's not to say that people can't undergo radiation and chemo and things like that, but I think I agreed with you that they're attacking the disease of cancer rather than reinforcing the organism's state of health, which should be what's most important, so [4:09] I just really like that. Yeah, go ahead. Their basic mistake, mainstream medicine now for about 100 years has been committed to the idea that cancer by mutation is something alien to the human being, but the mutations are the attempt to survive and remain part of the human organism. They are our cells that are struggling and if you focus on killing these cells that are already very weak and damaged, you forget that what kills them kills or injures the rest of the human cells. They are so similar or it's kind of like trying to, it's more possible to kill an invasive [5:13] fungus, but still things that kill fungus or amoebas, for example, are always harmful to the human host. If you look at the very few people who have studied untreated cancer patients, starting as far as I know in the 1950s with the University of California Professor Hardin Jones, he took people who for some reason refused treatment after being diagnosed and these people almost always lived longer than the thoroughly treated people, the people who rejected treatment and since those aren't taken into account, everyone who is diagnosed with cancer essentially gets the killing treatment and if you really did a control, you would compare the absence of [6:25] treatment to a particular treatment, but I've read through many volumes of the cancer research journal and invariably they fail to take into account the possibility that the treatment ever kills anyone. If hundreds and hundreds of articles absolutely insist that everyone who dies, dies from cancer. They don't even consider the possibility that the treatment increases as. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, like you mentioned, it's about reinforcing health. How can you reinforce the state of health in the organism if you're attacking both the good and the bad cells with some sort of therapy? It just doesn't make sense and there's a big debate out there about taking supplements when undergoing cancer treatment, but my job as a nutritionist is to support that host [7:30] immune system and reinforce the state of health and so there's this debate like you can't take antioxidants during a radiation therapy or during a chemo treatment and I can see both sides. I can see how the supplement depending on which one it is could interfere with the oxidant support of the cell or the antioxidant capability that you're trying to kill off with the radiation or whatever. But at the same time, what about all the good? Like you've got this one little area that's cancerous, but you've got the 90%!o(MISSING)f you that's really good. Shouldn't we support that and shouldn't we come at it from a standpoint of helping rather than harming? Yeah, and the treatment industry has covered up the fact that there is no such thing as a local, a purely local cancer treatment. For example, the focusing radiation beam, they say if we aim it at the cancer, the rest [8:36] of your body isn't affected, but experiments show that, for example, they noticed that exposing mice to x-rays caused them to go into heat preparing to mate and the explanation was that they had excited their pituitary. So someone did the proper control and it radiated their feet and found that that caused them to go into heat. And the same with any very serious damage to any part of the body. It spreads signals of the damage to all parts of the body so that in Seattle there was this idea of pregnant women who had a full set of dental x-rays, even though they shielded [9:37] their abdomen, their babies were born under weight showing that the stress damage signals affected every part of the body just from supposedly exposing the head and jaw to x-rays. Yeah, no, you don't hear about this stuff. All you hear about is the different doctors saying this is the only path and we only have this. This is our approach is like kill, kill, kill, and there's so many other avenues. I loved in your newsletter where you were mentioning things like mTOR and things that could inhibit mTOR include caffeine and aspirin and lidocaine and vitamin D and flavonoids. Can you briefly fill us in layman's terms, how does mTOR work within some sort of inhibitory action with cancer and why these things are important? [10:39] Yeah, mTOR is phosphorylating, activating enzyme and this particular enzyme activates all of the growth processes. For normal growth, it's always acting, but all of the growth promoting factors have to know when to stop. If you have stress going on, circulating lactic acid, for example, from any kind of systemic stress, lactic acid is enough to keep the mTOR activating growth processes without the appropriate need for it. And so lactic acid is carcinogenic by not allowing the body to turn off growth when it [11:42] should and it turns out that stress tissues produce lactic acid, so you get a vicious circle. Yeah, and I appreciated that in your newsletter, you did mention, I mean, there are some of the flavonoids known as antioxidants like absorbic acid and things like that, that they can become an issue like reducing agents for stuff like radiation and stuff like that. So are there certain supplements that people can do if they've been diagnosed and they're undergoing these treatments, they choose to go that route? And are there different ones they shouldn't do? Yeah, in the right amount, the antioxidants will actually be beneficial. But when they get inside the cell, a typical antioxidant like ascorbic acid or some of the flavonoids like vice-seton are no longer reducing agents and no longer [12:52] are known by donating electrons, but they become oxidizing agents and keep the cell from having an excess of electrons. And one of the most basic features of cancer is that they have an excess of electrons. The presence of lactic acid in the system, for example, means that your cells have an excess of electrons. If you simply shut off the oxygen supply, you'll shift over to lactic acid production because electrons become excessive and will turn pyruvic acid in the lactic acid and with all of the cell activating effects. And so some very, very well informed leading biological thinkers are still confused on the [14:06] issue. They still think that more electrons will be good for cancer patients, but in fact, the failure to oxidize, meaning that your cells have too many electrons, that's the essence of cancer and why the increase of lactic acid is a universal feature of cancer. Okay, yeah, and so it's best to get flavonoids from food. I love that you said that in your newsletter. Are there certain ones, let's say someone listening to this has been diagnosed with cancer and they're undergoing, maybe they've chosen to go these therapies such as radiation or chemo, where would you steer them? What protocol or suggestions would you give them to help them reinforce their state of health rather than just do the attack? The reason doctors advise against using some supplements like vitamin E [15:15] is that they are wanting to create free radical oxidation, which always results from an excess of electrons activating catalytic iron, for example, to create free radicals. I knew someone who was taking protective substances and the doctor prescribed the standard course of chemotherapy and said it would be no more than I think it was three doses of it, absolutely three doses was all that would be needed, but after three doses he said well we need another three doses and after that three doses he said well you need another three doses and she said I finally got him to admit that he had previously said [16:20] only three would be needed and he explained that your hair hasn't fallen out and you're not an enic and those were the judge, the basis for your judging, you have to radically harm the whole organism before you're satisfied that the chemotherapy is working. She ended up looking for thermal therapy, hypothermia to treat the cancer, which there's a lot of research showing that getting the body temperature up to just a little above 41 degrees Celsius will kill cancer cells without harming healthy cells if you keep feeding the person so they don't get hypoglycemia damage, but she went to a place to advertise hypothermia, but the government [17:23] required that they give a minimal dose they said of x-rays along with the hypothermia and after a couple of doses of the treatment I got her to inquire how they were judging that she had reached a hypothermic state and they told her oh the computer does that, no thermometers involved just absolute mystical computer knowledge and then she asked how many rads was she getting and I think it was 800 rads to her whole pelvis which included the intestine and she was getting classical radiation sickness which sets in around a whole body dose of about 400 or 500 rads, so she had had about three times the dose that causes [18:28] radiation sickness and very quickly after that died from radiation sickness, not from cancer. Yeah it's like logic has gone by the wayside when it comes to our medical system it's just like it's just a sad approach because I think there are protocols and suggestions that people can do to reinforce so like in your newsletter progesterone and you mentioned vitamin D can you talk about that? Yeah both of those systemically lower inflammation so they're just as good for treating COVID as for cancer or psychiatric diseases or or a cold because what they do is turn the body towards healthy energy production through oxygen and by reducing [19:34] the inflammation they are letting the body restore itself. Wonderful now everything. Oh go ahead. Antithystamines are another pretty safe way to do that and in a previous newsletter I reviewed some of the articles showing the benefits of exercise and they found that the good things about exercise that help you maintain good muscles, good hormone balance, all kinds of good health points, they found that only when the exercise was sufficient to raise your body temperature did it produce that anti-inflammatory restorative effect and if they raised the body temperature to that point the same temperature that adequate exercise produces [20:43] they got just as much anti-inflammatory effect so it's the body temperature falling below normal that is a basic activator of inflammation and all of the major carcinogens by reducing oxygen metabolism lower the body temperature and so necessarily result in systemic inflammation. So important to keep that thyroid working and keep that body temperature where it should be in cancer prevention then that sounds like so going back to the vitamin D I kind of had something I wanted to really bring up because there's controversy out there a lot of people are not on the bandwagon of vitamin D supplementation they feel like you should just get it from the sun but what about these as a nutritionist I'm seeing people that as much as I would love them to go [21:43] outside they're going out covered up they're wearing sunscreen or maybe they're only going out long enough to walk around the block so there's not to mention the fact that there's published data that now there's nanoparticles being sprayed in our atmosphere they're blocking the sun's rays so that leads me to believe that we do need some form of vitamin D supplementation in certain people that just will not go outside what about what are your thoughts on that I mean are you for vitamin D with K2 supplementation or do you feel like it should just be from the sun? I ideally it would be from the sun but I've talked to people in Saudi Arabia and Latin America there's a tremendous like an epidemic or worse of vitamin D deficiency in the traditionally Muslim and Catholic countries women in particular well the Saudi Arabians even the men were [22:51] pretty much total body covers but the women don't let any skin be exposed to the sunlight and so they have a terrible vitamin D deficiency the same in Mexico people are even the new generations that aren't following the pretty old cover-up practices they have dark skin and don't want to get a darker skin and so they just for cosmetic purposes like to be protected from the sun and I used to sunburn terribly from I guess my 20s through my 60s at 7,000 feet altitude I could get an intense sunburn in about five minutes [23:57] of sun exposure but after I started supplementing vitamin D the next time I was in Mexico at over 7,000 feet altitude I found that I didn't sunburn at all I could work outside for hours without turning bright red and I've heard other people say that that when they take vitamin D they can then expose themselves to the sun without burning or even just a moderate degree of tanning so if you are avoiding the sunlight for some reason then you absolutely need to supplement vitamin B and it it turns out all of the protective anti-inflammatory processes [24:58] I agree I mean I would love like you said ideally I would love all of my clients to spend as much time outside that they can but it's just it seems like I can't get people to do that so the next best thing is like I find a good quality vitamin D to get them on and yeah like you said myself included I don't burn also I think that's due to low poofas I have found that eliminating poofas a long time ago I don't burn and I think that has a lot to do with the body's inflammatory response with the sun too would you say yeah polyunsaturated fatty acids act as an antenna ultraviolet light excites those molecules causes them to have excitatory excited electrons that then spread inflammation to other less sensitive substances so they're like the antenna [25:59] to spread ultraviolet damage if you have a rabbit experiment years ago they shaved rabbits and exposed them to ultraviolet similar to sunlight and the ones the rabbits that had a poofa free diet didn't get wrinkly skin the ones on a high polyunsaturated fatty acid diet got very wrinkled after exposing their skin to sun to radiation ultraviolet nice yeah go ahead what do you think I just there are several things that will will sensitize you with a bad diet high and poofa is one of the most age-promoting factors absolutely yeah so I wanted to ask one more thing before we jump into questions because in your newsletter there was something that stuck [27:03] out to me that I kind of just briefly touched on but I wanted to get your thoughts on it so you had mentioned that although the great majority of cancers have clear environmental causes the carcinogenic pollution caused by governments and large corporations is ignored and so it's like putting the blame on the defective genes of the victims so I wanted to talk about the pollution caused by governments now I had mentioned that I am seeing data on the fact that there is grid patterns in our sky there's these clouds that make an x there's lines in the sky that they're clearly spraying something into our atmosphere there's published data on it do you think that this is something we need to be concerned about that whatever the nanoparticles that they're spraying are dimming our sun's rays and is this part of that heavy metal pollution we're exposed to depending on what they're spraying that has been planned research [28:07] for a long time Bill Gates was one of the promoters of it and when the public heard about it they said oh it's just research we don't really plan to go ahead with that but I don't believe them I'm sure they're continually working on it yeah I want people to be aware I want you guys to start looking up and just doing your own research because I think they've got us programmed to look down at our phones so we don't see what's going on in our skies but I highly recommend checking out geoengineeringwatch.org because there's a lot of published data there and it's not conspiracy because there's there's research on it so just be aware there's changes in our sky that are affecting our health too and I believe some of that heavy metal nanoparticles could be part of that carcinogenic pollution that you're talking about too and one source of pollution [29:09] that is often forgotten or covered up is that the Pentagon is the world's biggest single source of pollution that they can dump anything they want to anywhere they want to and they've killed and injured many military people the Gulf War syndrome was just part of it but burning toxic agents in open dumps in when a war is going on the soldiers are being horribly exposed to these toxins wow yeah something that's I'm glad you brought that up I'm going to look into that too because I wasn't even aware of that so well I think we will jump into questions here because I could talk to you about this stuff all day but I know everybody wants me to get to their questions so Kylie is our first one on the list today she asks or she's kind of explaining that [30:16] she has low TSH free T3 is low free T4 is low she's tried cytomel and NDT but immediately she lost her period it took her five months to get her period back while on cytomel but she was still hyper symptomatic so she stopped it she's had thyroid issues her whole life so she's wondering if it was her nervous system that needed to adjust should she have stayed on it or is there something else she should do Dr Pete it's important to know that the function of T3 partly is to improve oxidation that your liver needs to maintain the continuous activation of the thyroid and to make your liver able to detoxify hormones that are in excess and so you can if [31:16] you have heavy menstruation or continuous hemorrhaging you can turn it off quickly by increasing your T3 intake but normally the body produces only probably a maximum of two or three micrograms per hour of T3 by its own conversion from thyroxin and people often the worst thing is to start out taking maybe your whole base dose all at once on an empty stomach before breakfast and that for sure will give you the message goes to your liver that you have a gigantic excess of thyroid and so you activate the liver to get rid of the excess thyroid and that means that after doing that for a while [32:19] just a couple weeks there's enough to see it happening your liver in just 12 hours after you have taken that one morning dose your liver will create extreme hypothyroidism because it has learned to get rid of the excess but then when you don't keep adding it your liver pushes you to a very low level that's one of the reasons a mixed product like a natural desiccated thyroid a product like arm or thyroid USP for example has a reasonable balance the same balance that you would normally produce with your own thyroid or a synthetic such as seno plus or [33:22] about four or five parts of thyroxin to each part of T3 so the T3 can activate your processes and the T4 is available to continue to keep up your T3 level without at any time forcing you into the hyperthyroid state that you get when you take even 10 micrograms of cytomel at once will give you the signal of excess that will lead to reduced thyroid function. Yeah and she didn't specify how much she was taking so that's another thing you know maybe if she started with too high of a dose and then also like since the NDT is going to have some T3 in there along with the cytomel maybe it was just too much for her and she should just look at starting with like a really low you know five micrograms of [34:22] the cytomel or something what do you think about that? Yeah five micrograms with a meal is okay it's more than you would want on an empty stomach but the meal slows its absorption over a period of about two or three hours and it's very important to check things like your temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure and so on and to not expect things to be normal immediately. What's for changes to gradually increase over a period of two weeks or more and many people want to see quick results and that leads up to getting very disturbed ups and downs of the metabolic rate that makes it very hard to find the right level [35:25] so traditionally people who have really studied thyroid function like brutal barns would take several months usually to determine what their correct dose was and the correct dose varies typically fourfold just by seasonal changes in day length. I found that in the winter I needed two grains of armor thyroid to maintain my temperature and heart rate and that gradually as starting in the spring decreased to half a grain per day to maintain the same level of function and metabolic rate. Nice yeah that's it I like that you mentioned the part about her taking it with a meal because I think there is a misconception out there my most [36:28] thyroid medications are told to take you know on an empty stomach right when you wake up 20 to 30 minutes before eating and I like that you're what you're saying is they really need to take it with food I've always thought that that that would be more efficient slowing down how quickly it's absorbed and so that makes a lot more sense than on an empty stomach. I've heard practically all pharmacists and doctors give that take it on an empty stomach in the morning recommendation but I tried to find out what their reasoning was. There is no reasoning that they based their thought on how do you get efficient absorption they want to think about not wasting any of the thyroid so you do get the full amount that you have consumed if your stomach is empty it shows up in your bloodstream right away [37:35] but the thyroid never works that way naturally it it seeps out as you need it so if you have enough food to keep your blood sugar up and your stress hormones low your body will continue to convert thyroxin to T3 exactly the right amount but it is a continuous moment by moment process absolutely without any biological sense to recommend taking your day's dose on an empty stomach. Okay so next question Zed asked okay this is kind of a long question here so Dr. Pete was asked in the past if he believes one can regrow hair back to their juvenile hairline he replied that it may not be possible I would love to know if someone was willing to [38:35] dedicate all of their time to this this is a cool guy what further steps could be taken after addressing TSH temperature vitamin D and calcium for example microneedling scalp massage or even hanging upside down maybe a high dose of vitamin K to decalcify the scalp anything that he thinks could help thank you so much. Scalp massage definitely helps hair loss from a variety of causes even alopecia ariata can be helped by massage even though that's an autoimmune spotty a loss of hair the massage helps to normalize getting the cell energy back up but I've never known any single individual who wanted to put in the necessary time really could [39:41] it involve basically everything you do but it isn't benefiting only your scalp because people you've probably heard of the ear lobe crease people people who are bald have a very high incidence of a crease across their ear lobe and that crease happens to be an indicator of susceptibility to heart disease and so there's a known association between circulatory system health and good hair growth so the things that help to restore the health of your follicles are also helping every other part of your body. I love that I think it goes back to like grandma's [40:42] logic of like brush your hair a hundred times because people I think they're afraid when you're losing your hair you're kind of afraid to brush your hair because you think it's gonna you're just going to brush it and pull it out but we just brushing your hair like a scalp massage or you know there's a company that makes a derma tool for your head where you just kind of like stimulate the scalp I think those are going to be more beneficial because what you're doing is you're drawing blood to that area increasing circulation so you know like brushing your hair you might yeah you might lose some hairs the first few times you do it but then you're going to start stimulating that blood flow and hopefully improving the hairline as well yeah yeah and putting your fingers on your scalp without moving them against the skin but wiggling your fingers so that you're moving the skin around that kind of 15 minutes per day and that amount of massage can very significantly improve hair growth [41:47] getting your temperature getting your temperature up to normal I think is a big part of it I looked at the normal range of temperatures in the brain and it happens that the highest temperatures are towards the middle and rear of the brain and that for best functioning the highest part of the brain the frontal lobes of the cortex have to be slightly cooler than the central part of the brain they have to be able to be quiet rather than overactive and the hair cover at the top and back of your head is helping to insulate your your head so that [42:51] you don't lose a temperature so easily before you have heavy hair growth but the fact that hair doesn't grow on the forehead is probably associated with the fact that your frontal lobes should be cooler and so your forehead is like a radiator that helps to maintain that gradient of temperature inside your brain optimizing your prefrontal cortex functions well I really love that my brain is really warm right now because you you make me think so much so like just listening to you share that your knowledge like makes my brain like feel warmer so that's cool okay so Zed had one more question in his email he said when my heart rate increases after exercise gets a little strenuous the inside of my nose becomes very cold and painful to breathe [43:53] through and almost closes up does Dr. Pete know what could cause this and how to avoid it yeah that's too much adrenaline at different I used to notice that if I was in a study project for example and went too long drinking coffee I would get that sensation but my nose membranes dried out and cooled and my sinuses extended that feeling of too much air in contact with them I think is that the high adrenaline simply reduces circulation to your nose and sinus membranes sounds like maybe his in his exercise maybe not as strenuous maybe just moving your body without getting too much adrenaline going yeah I yeah not doing things that [45:01] are and to raise your heart rate too much but the kind of muscle exercise that heats up your muscles and then they heat your whole body and increase the temperature so listing weights or using dumbbells enough to warm up your muscles raise your body temperature won't necessarily make you breathe any harder yeah excellent love that okay so I can't pronounce this name but this it starts with a K and it says what are Dr. Pete's thoughts on high dose vitamin E is it safe to take up to 3000 I use per day thank you there have been tests and it was right around 3000 or 4000 units a day that would cause [46:01] the vitamin E to produce diarrhea it was simply a physical overload that probably irritated the intestine and they found that you couldn't absorb above a certain limit it produced diarrhea and was useless but they didn't see any damage from doses up to that point but you have to remember that the product they call vitamin E has changed pretty continuously through technology the 20s and 30s when it was known as a fertility of vitamin that's where the name came from toco for all offspring bearing and so a deficiency was defined as the sterility level [47:03] and that worked because vitamin E protects against estrogen estrogen is the anti progesterone anti fertility agent and so progesterone and vitamin E were found at the late 1930s to be working together to protect against estrogen and so to improve fertility and the side effect many other changes but at that point for various reasons the estrogen industry didn't want vitamin E to be known as an pro fertility anti estrogen chemical so they promoted the idea that it's nothing but an antioxidant and so for years vitamin E was defined as its antioxidant potency [48:12] which corresponded to the D-alpha tocoferol concentration and the total vitamin E effect was considered only the antioxidant potency and for time the vitamin E value was defined as the D-alpha tocoferol content now it has changed again and so they specify the proportion of all of the isomers of vitamin E and the definition has changed and along with it the way they prepare the vitamin and so it's the way it's prepared is extremely different for example the octocosin portion used to be an major part of the function [49:16] and now that it's removed changing the consistency of the vitamin E and also apparently reducing its biological values so that starting 20 or 30 years ago there has been a campaign to warn people about the potential dangers of high intake of vitamin E and since the benefits were established with different different products and different definitions about 60 or 70 years ago we don't really have any good research evaluating what's going on with present products of vitamin E so I think it's best to be very cautious with your dosing. Very good okay so DopaCiva or DapoCiva maybe is the name asks about Blackstrap molasses unsulfurred is it a good source of carbs potassium and minerals thanks a million. [50:22] Years ago I noticed that it had sort of a smoky taste and so I investigated how it's made and when you put your crude cane juice through the crystallization process the brown stuff gradually it doesn't crystallize and so as you crystallize the pure sucrose molecules you're separating a gummy brown substance and it turns out that the standard way to make sugar is to burn the cane fields and then to cut down the bare stalks and grind that up to make your cane juice and if you burn the cane before you extract the sugar you're going to get [51:27] a lot of smoky material mixed in with the various nutrients that produce the brown stuff and so heat over exposure to heat will also cause the amino acids in the natural cane juice to react with the glucose in the juice that produces toxic brown material and so the brownness at least reflects the heat breakdown products involving amino acids and probably most often involves some smoke resulting from burning the cane so the fact that a lot of people have an allergy-like reaction to Blackstrap I think could steer people away from it. Okay good to know all right these last couple of [52:34] questions here we'll take and then we'll save the rest for next time since we're running short on time here but these last questions are related they're both asthma questions so Constantine asks hi Dr. Pete I'm a 23 year old male and I've had bad asthma since I was two my asthma is serious enough that I need to use some type of inhaler daily when it's very bad I use an inhaled corticosteroid and when it's more manageable I use a rescue inhaler that is androgenic agonist I know these are both harmful drugs to use daily so I would very much like to get off of them I've been experimenting with syproheptidine, pregnant alone, and progesterone as alternatives but none have been able to prevent me from needing my asthma inhaler. Do you have any ideas on what I can do to get off the inhaler or alternatively on what I can do to mitigate the harm done by using the inhalers? I'm checking your foods a very careful elimination diet can usually identify foods [53:48] that make the symptoms worse by stimulating different parts of the intestine researchers have found that you can produce all sorts of psychosomatic conditions everything from asthma to migraines to epilepsy can be provoked by irritating certain parts of the intestine and so constipation, diarrhea of some types and anything that tends to cause pressure or irritation in the lower intestine is a major cause of asthma and so looking for foods that are hard to digest you can often get a good diet by eliminating certain foods for example [54:51] green salads lettuce or spinach leaves that aren't cooked are extremely irritating to the intestine promote bacterial growth and the toxin production as well as just a direct irritation from the nature of the leaf and sometimes simply eliminating salads and undercooked vegetables will do it the right kind of fiber will sometimes stop the whole problem by getting food to move through you faster before it can reach that degree of pressure and irritation that's so interesting yeah I would definitely second that the gut is always a good place to go when dealing with anything that's you know causing a reaction in the body as well as [55:52] the how about balancing blood sugar do you think that would matter if he's going the long stretch of time without eating would balancing his blood sugar would that help the body calm down too exactly the both the chemical irritants and the mechanical irritants are ineffective if you have high blood sugar or adequate blood sugar but for example if you have a an inflatable balloon in the animal's intestine and the animal has good blood sugar if you blow up the balloon nothing happens but if it's blood sugar is a little on the low side you blow up the balloon you can produce instant asthma symptoms because the autonomic nervous system is destabilized by low sugar same with allergens but low blood sugar makes you allergic to more things yeah I [56:56] would agree with that too so Ruth also asked a question on asthma she said what are Dr. Pete's views on the use of those inhalers her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes throughout the night as well what are your views on inhalers and why her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes what is interrupted by the hot flashes sleep yeah her sleep is interrupted by hot flashes throughout the night yeah progesterone by maintaining your body temperature and oxygen used during the night will improve the depth and restfulness of your sleep if your progesterone is low and usually if your thyroid is low your blood sugar is unstable falls too low during the night and will trigger all kinds of symptoms hot flashes night sweats [57:57] nocturnal asthma and nocturnal epilepsy are very well known consequences of the falling blood sugar during the night painful things become more painful at night because of falling blood sugar yeah for sure yeah definitely the progesterone can help with hot flashes just in general in the night so um there was something else that you said that made me want to oh what were you going to say uh experimenters have used something like a cup full of corn starch as a way to give pure carbohydrate at bedtime and I found that even though that was not good nutrition it would prevent the hot flashes by giving you a constant supply of glucose during the night that's so interesting like I've had myself included people mentioned [58:58] that corn in general it seems like they sleep better when they have corn for dinner do you have any thoughts on this because I don't really love corn for the fact of it does it seems to be a food that can elevate blood sugar sometimes too high in certain people but you know I'm hearing that it actually can help with sleep would you have any reason why yeah it doesn't have for example gluten if they're eating corn they might stop eating so much wheat and gluten and especially if the corn is in the form of tortillas or lime processed corn that becomes very anti-inflammatory uh just having some oat bran oatmeal or oat bran mush at bedtime those are often very protective keeping your blood sugar [1:00:02] up that's so interesting yeah I don't have corn very often but I find that if I have it for dinner like you mentioned like homemade corn tortillas or something it's like my sleep is just phenomenal so I find that interesting okay that's all we have for today because we'll wrap up here and we'll save the rest for next time but Dr. Pete this is always so enlightening and educational and I love hearing your views on so many different topics so we'll get to more questions next time but you guys check out his newsletter that's rey Pete's newsletter at gmail.com if you missed this one if you haven't signed up yet I highly recommend going ahead and ordering it and maybe just shoot him an email and I bet they'll send that one to you that they just put out because it is really excellent Dr. Pete that carcinogenic metabolism was was really a big eye opener so thank you for that and thank you for being a part of this today okay thank you okay bye for now we'll talk soon bye [1:01:11] hey guys are you in the midwest are you in the east coast are you in brazil are you in asia it doesn't matter where you are I would love to work with you as your nutritionist and so just to let you know I offer nutrition consulting worldwide you can work with me anywhere I have clients all over the world and I love to spend time over the internet with each one of them figuring out their specific needs so your specific needs what deficiencies are you having what symptoms are you dealing with daily that we can address for you so that's what I as a nutrition detective like to get to the bottom of I ask you a ton of questions we meet over zoom or over face time whatever is convenient for you and we discuss all of your specific needs if you would like to work with me just shoot me an email getfitwithjodell at gmail.com let's get fit g-e-t-f-i-t-w-i-t-h-j-o-d-e-l-l-e at gmail.com and let's set up a 15 minute free call for you just to see if I'm a good fit for you [1:02:14] as a nutrition therapy practitioner again email me getfitwithjodell at gmail.com and let's get you set up feeling better lose that unwanted weight that you have going on lose those symptoms that you have hanging around and optimize your health as best we can so a common question I get is what are some of my favorite supplements that I take daily well here are my faves just to name a few I love a good magnesium glycinate for stress and sleep I love a good multi-mineral to make sure I have all the raw materials for my thyroid and my metabolic processes I like bcaas branch chain amino acids when I can't get to adequate protein in the midst of a busy day and I never go a day without my vitamin d3 and k2 drops under my tongue you know supplements can be pricey and in a perfect world wouldn't it be nice to have a healthcare practitioner [1:03:18] assign your specific supplement needs to you and find the one bio individual supplement needs that match your body well that's where full script comes in my online supplement dispensary full script is where I can recommend the perfect supplements for you when we consult but also if we don't consult you can simply go to my full script online dispensary and find all of your favorite supplements at 15 to 20 off what you would normally pay in the store so full script has lots of my favorite brands like quick silver scientific and neutrosol and apex energetics and so much more hundreds more in fact even protein powders teas toothpaste and natural beauty products really great brands that I myself love and recommend so to try my full script out for yourself here's a couple of options you can number one click the link in the description to visit my full script page or you can enter us dot full script dot com slash welcome slash j fitswater [1:04:20] let me say that again that's us dot full script f u l l s c r i p t dot com slash welcome slash j is in jordell fitswater f i t z w a t e r or if that's too long and lengthy you can email me at getfitwithdrodel at gmail.com and I can set you up with a free full script account where I can help navigate the right supplements for you so full script is discreet with fast shipping that drops right to your doorstep no more running out to the local natural health food store when times just not on your side the world is simply does not offer enough raw materials naturally anymore to combat the modern stressors and that's why finding the right supplements that work can and will help you try my full script today save money and start feeling better i'm a simpleton really but I will say when it comes to skincare and hair care that there [1:05:20] are a couple products that I can say have really moved the needle for my skin and hair and also are easy to use they smell fantastic and they're all natural and that is amary giani skin care and hair care amary giani is a wild crafted herb based skincare line and recently they've launched a new shampoo and conditioner line which is phenomenal my hair has never felt better so if you're looking for really great wild crafted herbal based skincare I can't say enough about amary giani I love their charcoal mask and their pearl illuminating mask I'm a sucker for masks whenever I just want to feel like I'm having a spa day and giving myself some vitamin p right and so this is something you can get really inexpensive they've got a nice little trial kit you can pick up for as little as 1999 and it comes with a slew of little tiny travel toiletries you can take with you from their cleanser to their anti-aging serum to the little masks I love them and by the [1:06:26] way you can also purchase small amounts of their shampoo and conditioner to give it a try before you buy the big ones so check out amary giani skin care I've got a link in the show notes below and get this special trial offer that's only good for a limited amount of time try my favorite skin care I think it'll become your favorite skincare too